{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85036" } }
{"authors":"Darrel Robertson::NASA Ames Research Center--Donovan Mathias::NASA Ames Research Center--", "title":"NH11A-1891: Effect of Different Rock Models on Hydrocode Simulations of Asteroid Airburst and Impact Blast", "abstract":"Ground damage estimates from airburst or ground impact of asteroids depend on the shock waves and blast winds emitted. While semi-analytic models exist and hydrocode simulations of cratering are well studied, there is very little literature on the blast waves from asteroids hitting the Earth. The blast waves depend strongly on the energy deposition rate, which in turn depends on the break-up mechanics of the asteroid either during atmospheric entry or on the ground. This presentation will examine the effect of different rock models on the break-up and energy deposition. The simplest models can assign a single rock strength, chosen to match the burst altitude of previously observed airbursts. Such simple models can provide energy deposition curves that match observations reasonably well, but are not representative of the behaviour of real rock masses. We will compare the failure mechanisms and energy deposition of more sophisticated models including effects such as more realistic yield surfaces that account for tensile, shear, and compressive failure strengths, and size dependent features such as cracks, strength distributions, porosity, and variations in internal composition.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85036", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85037" } }
{"authors":"Matthias Falk::California Air Resources Board--Yanju Chen::California Air Resources Board--Toshihiro Kuwayama::California Environmental Protection Agency Air Resources Board--Abhilash Vijayan::California Air Resources Board--Jorn Herner::California Air Resources Board--Bart Croes::California Environmental Protection Agency Air Resources Board--", "title":"GC11B-1028: Overview of ARB’s Greenhouse Gas Research Program", "abstract":"Since the passage of the California Global Warming Solutions Act (or AB32) in 2006, California Air Resources Board (ARB) has established and implemented a comprehensive plan to understand, quantify, and mitigate the various greenhouse gas (GHG) emission source sectors in the state. ARB has also developed a robust and multi-tiered in-house research effort to investigate methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O) and fluorinated gas emission sources. This presentation will provide an overview of ARB’s monitoring and measurement research efforts to study the regional and local emission sources of these pollutants in California. ARB initiated the first subnational GHG Research Monitoring Network in 2010 to study the regional GHG emissions throughout the state. The network operates several high precision analyzers to study CH4, N2O, CO and CO2 emissions at strategically selected regional sites throughout California, and the resulting data are used to study the statewide emission trends and evaluate regional sources using statistical analyses and inverse modeling efforts. ARB is also collaborating with leading scientists to study important emission sources including agriculture, waste, and oil and gas sectors, and to identify ` hot spot`  methane sources through aerial surveys of high methane emitters in California. At the source level, ARB deploys Mobile Measurement Platforms (MMP) and flux chambers to measure local and source specific emissions, and uses the information to understand source characteristics and inform emissions inventories. Collectively, all these efforts are offering a comprehensive view of regional and local emission sources, and are expected to help in developing effective mitigation strategies to reduce GHG emissions in California.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85037", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85039" } }
{"authors":"Monika Pelz::Ocean Networks Canada--Natasha Ewing::Ocean Networks Canada--Maia Hoeberechts::Ocean Networks Canada--David Riddell::University of Victoria--Mercedes McLean::Ocean Networks Canada, University of Victoria--Jessica Brown::Ocean Networks Canada, University of Victoria--", "title":"ED51B-0818: Community Observatories: Fostering Ideas that STEM From Ocean Sense: Local Observations. Global Connections.", "abstract":"Ocean Networks Canada (ONC) uses education and communication to inspire, engage and educate via innovative “meet them where they are, and take them where they need to go” programs. ONC data are accessible via the internet allowing for the promotion of programs wherever the learners are located. We use technologies such as web portals, mobile apps and citizen science to share ocean science data with many different audiences. Here we focus specifically on one of ONC’s most innovative programs: community observatories and the accompanying Ocean Sense program. The approach is based on equipping communities with the same technology enabled on ONC’s large cabled observatories. ONC operates the world-leading NEPTUNE and VENUS cabled ocean observatories and they collect data on physical, chemical, biological, and geological aspects of the ocean over long time periods, supporting research on complex Earth processes in ways not previously possible. Community observatories allow for similar monitoring on a smaller scale, and support STEM efforts via a teacher-led program: Ocean Sense. This program, based on local observations and global connections improves data-rich teaching and learning via visualization tools, interactive plotting interfaces and lesson plans for teachers that focus on student inquiry and exploration. For example, students use all aspects of STEM by accessing, selecting, and interpreting data in multiple dimensions, from their local community observatories to the larger VENUS and NEPTUNE networks. The students make local observations and global connections in all STEM areas. The first year of the program with teachers and students who use this innovative technology is described. Future community observatories and their technological applications in education, communication and STEM efforts are also described.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85039", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85040" } }
{"authors":"Ophelia George::University of South Florida Tampa--Judy McIlrath::Univ South Florida--Alexandra Farrell::University of South Florida Tampa--Elisabeth Gallant::University of South Florida Tampa--Samantha Tavarez::University of South Florida Tampa--Christine Downs::University of South Florida Tampa--Mary Njoroge::University of South Florida Tampa--James Wilson::University of South Florida Tampa--Charles Connor::University of South Florida Tampa--Laura Connor::University of South Florida--Sarah Kruse::University of South Florida Tampa--", "title":"NS43B-1972: High-Resolution Ground-Based Magnetic Survey of a Buried Volcano: Anomaly B, Amargosa Desert, NV", "abstract":"Aeromagnetic surveys over the Amargosa Desert, Nevada, have revealed the presence of several magnetic anomalies that have been interpreted to be caused by buried volcanoes; many of these anomalies have been confirmed by drilling. We present data collected from a high-resolution, ground-based magnetic survey over Anomaly B, the largest of these anomalies, that reveal details about a buried crater and its associated lava flow, not previously observed in the aeromagnetic surveys. These details provide insight into the nature of the eruption and the volume of this buried volcano. Results from non-linear inversion demarcate a crater with a diameter of approximately 700 m and a base approximately 150 m below the ground surface. Coupled with well log data, the inversion results suggest a total volume for the Anomaly B crater area and associated lava flows of approximately 1.0 ± 0.4 km3, based on an estimated lava flow field area of 24 km2 and a lava thickness of 42 ± 15 m. ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85040", "section":"Near Surface Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85041" } }
{"authors":"Sarah Slotznick::California Institute of Technology--Samuel Webb::SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory--Joseph Kirschvink::California Institute of Technology--Woodward Fischer::Caltech--", "title":"PP31B-2252: Studying Iron Mineralogy to Understand Redox Conditions in the Mesoproterozoic Belt Basin, USA Using Complementary Microscopic, Spectroscopic, and Magnetic Techniques", "abstract":"Observations of iron chemistry and mineralogy over time provide a valuable tool for studying paleoenvironments, but questions still remain as to the redox character of Proterozoic basins after the rise of oxygen. To evaluate the mechanisms of iron mineralization in Proterozoic samples, we developed an approach that pairs the microscale textural techniques of light microscopy, magnetic scanning microscopy, and (synchrotron-based) microprobe x-ray spectroscopy with sensitive bulk rock magnetic experiments. Samples were collected from stratigraphic sections across the ~1.4 Ga lower Belt Group, Belt Supergroup, MT and ID, USA with a focus on excellently preserved sedimentary rocks, but also including those altered by a variety of diagenetic, metamorphic, and metasomatic events. Results show that even in the best-preserved parts of the Belt Basin, late diagenetic and/or metasomatic fluids affected (in some cases very mildly) the primary iron phases as evidenced by prevalent post‑depositional alterations such as rare base metal sulfides. In more heavily altered rocks, the appearance of pyrrhotite and other minerals signaled transformations in iron mineralogy through metamorphism and metasomatism. Despite these secondary phases crystallizing in an open fluid-rich system, primary records of redox chemistry were preserved in the recrystallized early diagenetic framboidal pyrite and (sub)micron-sized detrital magnetite grains. Detrital magnetite is not the most abundant iron-bearing phase in any of the samples (typically <0.01 wt%), but is widely observed in both proximal and deeper basin facies, illustrating an important detrital flux of iron to the basin and a highly reactive iron source for early diagenetic pyrite. Based on our analyses, we interpret the shallow waters of the Belt Basin to be oxic with sulfidic pore fluids and deeper waters in parts of the basin as likely euxinic, consistent with the results of some bulk geochemical proxies. This redox reconstruction also helps explain the exceptional fossil record and diversity of eukaryotes observed in Belt Basin paleoenvironments.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85041", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85042" } }
{"authors":"Clara Iwabe::UNESP Sao Paulo State University--Diogo Fusco::UNESP Sao Paulo State University--", "title":"A33A-0127: A Simple Algorithm to Identify and Track Trough and Ridge in Reanalysis Data", "abstract":"Currently, researchers work with large volumes of data, and this can spend more time to climatology and meteorology analysis. The use of objective methods are essential to reduce the time of data analysis. An indication of synoptic systems development in surface is the presence of trough in the middle level (500 hPa). That atmospheric pattern denotes strong indication of instability and changes in the weather. Many of algorithms tracking of meteorological systems are two-dimensional. For example, the tracking of cyclones are based on identification of minimum center of sea level pressure or center of cyclonic vorticity close to the surface. The goal of this work is the creation of the algorithm that identifies and tracks the trough and ridge at middle levels (500 hPa), which can be used for three-dimensional identification/tracking of the cyclone on surface. The algorithm consists in identifying the area where the trough/ridge is contained, besides to provide information of the location of the axis of the trough/ridge and its slope, amplitude and intensity. So, allowing associate the features of the trough/ridge with the features of the systems at the surface.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85042", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85043" } }
{"authors":"Aaron Moore::University of California Berkeley--Abby Ilan::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"ED41A-0846: Environmental Assessment of the City of El Cerrito, CA: Creek, Trash and Air Quality Analysis", "abstract":"The City of El Cerrito, CA is located within Western Contra Costa County and adjacent to the San Francisco Bay. Local land-uses that affect its overall public and environmental health include major freeways, railways, and commercial and industrial zones. In an effort to assess the overall health of the local environment, students at Korematsu Middle School conducted a comprehensive analysis that included street litter auditing, water monitoring of Cerritos Creek and air quality measurements made along local streets. In 2014 the City of El Cerrito adopted a long-term trash plan that included strategies for reducing trash loads of local stormwater sewer systems. This plan called for load reduction of 70% by July 1, 2017 and 100% by July 1, 2022. To evaluate the effectiveness of the trash plan, our team quantified and scored trash concentration levels at two locations—one in a residential neighborhood and the other in a commercial zone. We also monitored water quality at nearby Cerritos Creek to investigate the impacts that each area’s trash concentrations had on water quality. We also monitored particulate matter (PM) concentration levels in air within these locations to determine whether or not differences exist between residential and commercial areas. Preliminary analysis of litter data suggests that the Long Term Trash Plan has thus far been effective in reducing concentrations of street litter along San Pablo Avenue, which is located within a major commercial zone, but has been inadequate in reducing trash in nearby parks. Water quality results indicate that Cerritos Creek contains waters that are quite healthy with respect to Ammonia and Nitrate concentration levels (i.e., very low values for every sample collected). However, elevated concentration levels of Phosphates were detected in every sample collected. Air quality data surprisingly revealed that extremely high PM concentration levels occur in air surrounding a residential park in El Cerrito.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85043", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85044" } }
{"authors":"Robert Portmann::NOAA Boulder--Erik Larson::NOAA Boulder--", "title":"OS41A-1991: The Earth's Energy Budget Across CMIP5 Models", "abstract":"The earth's energy budget is analyzed across models in the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project 5 (CMIP5) archive and compared with observations. The total energy added to the earth system along with the fate of that energy is analyzed. The energy added to the system is derived from the radiative forcing and is separated into individual forcing terms. The fate of the energy is controlled by the size of the climate feedback to the applied forcing. The relationship between the forcing, feedback, and the stored energy varies greatly across CMIP5 models. The model relationships are compared to observations during the recent time period since 1950 (including the hiatus period). This provides a stringent test of model fidelity against observation, although in some models it is hampered by the inability to adequately remove model drifts. It is found that while the multi-model means of the terms in the earth's energy budgets are in reasonable agreement with observations there are substantial range across individual models.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85044", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85046" } }
{"authors":"Philip Saksa::University of California Merced--Roger Bales::University of California Merced--Martha Conklin::University of California Merced--", "title":"H11C-1361: Forest Fuel Reduction and Wildfire Effects on Runoff and Evapotranspiration in Sierra Nevada Mixed-Conifer Forest", "abstract":"Large, high-intensity wildfire risk in the western United States is growing, fueled by increasing vegetation density from a century of fire suppression and climatic shifts resulting in extended dry seasons. Strategically Placed Landscape Treatments (SPLATs) are a fuel reduction method designed to reduce fire risk on the entire landscape by treating only a fraction of the area. During 2011 and 2012, SPLATs were implemented in the mixed-conifer zone of the Tahoe (Last Chance study area, American River Basin) and Sierra (Sugar Pine study area, Merced River Basin) National Forests. Wildfire events were then simulated for both treated and untreated conditions. We integrated the vegetation changes with the Regional Hydro-Ecological Simulation System (RHESSys) to project impacts of fuel treatments and wildfire on runoff and evapotranspiration for the period of observed data, water years 2010-2013. Results from the model simulations show that vegetation treatments in the Last Chance study area, which removed 8.0% of the total biomass by treating 25% of the area, increased mean annual runoff by 12.0% and decreased mean annual evapotranspiration by 4.1%. Vegetation treatments in the Sugar Pine study area, which removed 7.5% of the total biomass by treating 33% of the area, increased runoff by 2.7% and decreased ET by 0.5%. Compared to pre-treatment conditions, wildfire simulations in Last Chance reduced total biomass by 38-50% when fuel treatments were not applied, resulting in a 55-67% runoff increase and a 19-23% evapotranspiration decrease. In Sugar Pine, fire simulation reduced biomass 39-43%, increasing runoff and decreasing ET by 13-15% and 1.8-2.7% respectively. Applying the same magnitude of biomass reductions equally over the entire watershed, in contrast to the localized areas of vegetation reductions due to treatment or fire, resulted in smaller impacts on runoff and evapotranspiration rates. Vegetation effects on hydrologic fluxes are greater in Last Chance than in Sugar Pine, and can be attributed to the higher precipitation rates, suggesting vegetation in the Sugar Pine area is more water-limited. These model results also indicate that strategic fuel treatments implemented to reduce the risk of high-intensity fire have a potential benefit of producing additional water yield.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85046", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85048" } }
{"authors":"Jun-Hak Lee::University of Texas at Arlington--", "title":"PA31C-2172: Estimating the relationship between urban 3D morphology and land surface temperature using airborne LiDAR and Landsat-8 Thermal Infrared Sensor data", "abstract":"Urban forests are known for mitigating the urban heat island effect and heat-related health issues by reducing air and surface temperature. Beyond the amount of the canopy area, however, little is known what kind of spatial patterns and structures of urban forests best contributes to reducing temperatures and mitigating the urban heat effects. Previous studies attempted to find the relationship between the land surface temperature and various indicators of vegetation abundance using remote sensed data but the majority of those studies relied on two dimensional area based metrics, such as tree canopy cover, impervious surface area, and Normalized Differential Vegetation Index, etc. This study investigates the relationship between the three-dimensional spatial structure of urban forests and urban surface temperature focusing on vertical variance. We use a Landsat-8 Thermal Infrared Sensor image (acquired on July 24, 2014) to estimate the land surface temperature of the City of Sacramento, CA. We extract the height and volume of urban features (both vegetation and non-vegetation) using airborne LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) and high spatial resolution aerial imagery. Using regression analysis, we apply empirical approach to find the relationship between the land surface temperature and different sets of variables, which describe spatial patterns and structures of various urban features including trees. Our analysis demonstrates that incorporating vertical variance parameters improve the accuracy of the model. The results of the study suggest urban tree planting is an effective and viable solution to mitigate urban heat by increasing the variance of urban surface as well as evaporative cooling effect.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85048", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85049" } }
{"authors":"Kara Brugman::Arizona State University--Christy Till::Arizona State University--Maitrayee Bose::Arizona State University--Richard Hervig::Arizona State University--", "title":"V31B-3030: Development of Clinopyroxene as an Igneous Geospeedometer Using NanoSIMS", "abstract":"Geospeedometry, the quantification of timescales from diffusional relaxation of compositional zoning in minerals, is usually implemented using quartz, feldspar, and olivine. Clinopyroxene (cpx), commonly found in both igneous and metamorphic rocks as well as in meteorites, could also be a powerful tool for diffusion-related applications, once the appropriate suite of magmaphile elements with different diffusivities is identified—especially where the initial condition cannot be assumed to be a step function. Here we develop the use of cpx as a geospeedometer in rhyolitic magma by investigating slow diffusing elements via SIMS and NanoSIMS analyses using Yellowstone Plateau rhyolite lavas as a test case. LA-ICPMS analyses identified slow diffusing elements with resolvable abundances in the Yellowstone cpx; Ce and Dy were the best candidates, because experimental studies demonstrate they diffuse 12–88 times slower at a given temperature than elements such as Fe-Mg, which are typically used for diffusion dating in pyroxene. SIMS profiles with ≤ 8 micron resolution across intracrystalline zone boundaries reveal Ce and Dy abundances of ~175 ppm and ~78 ppm respectively, but also motivate analyses with higher spatial resolution in order to quantify concentration gradients for diffusion modeling. Subsequent NanoSIMS profiles at 0.2–1 micron spacing across intracrystalline zone boundaries capture Ce and Dy gradients that can be used to provide rejuventation-eruption timescales from the Yellowstone cpx. SIMS analyses employing energy filtering vs. those collected at full transimission both replicate the cpx Ce and Dy zoning and indicate there are not significant mass interferences for Ce and Dy, confirming that the NanoSIMS results replicate true intracrystalline variation. In addition, NanoSIMS Si, Mg, Fe, Ce, and Dy distribution maps of individual exsolution lamellae from the cpx cores provide information about the cooling history of the cpx.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85049", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85050" } }
{"authors":"Rebecca French::University of Connecticut--Alexander Felson::Yale University--Elizabeth Kirmmse::University of Connecticut--Katherine Hagemann::University of Connecticut--", "title":"PA42A-06: Safe Shores and Resilient Transit Corridors: Using Science, Design, and Stakeholder Partnerships to Address Connecticut’s Coastal Vulnerabilities", "abstract":"Connecticut’s densely developed coastline is highly vulnerable to sea level rise and coastal storms. 95% of the state’s entire population lives within 50 miles of the shore. Connecticut has more than $542 billion in insured assets in harms way, only Florida has a greater exposure. As part of the state of Connecticut Phase 1 application for the HUD National Disaster Resilience Competition, the Connecticut Institute for Resilience and Climate Adaptation (CIRCA) at the University of Connecticut undertook an assessment of coastal vulnerabilities, including the impacts of sea level rise on the frequency of flooding, socioeconomic factors, critical infrastructure, and housing using data collected from federal, state, and municipal sources. Connecticut’s unique geology, characterized by a glaciated coastline with highly erodible former deltas and elevated ridgelines extending out to rocky headlands, became the basis of the climate adaptation approach. Together with a nine state agency workgroup, municipal and regional government, and non-profit and industry representatives, CIRCA and the Yale UED lab developed a long-term urban redevelopment solution of resilient access and egress corridors layered over ridgelines and resilient zones of transit oriented economic development linked to shoreline communities. This concept can be applied in both Connecticut’s coastal cities like New Haven and its smaller towns. The process demonstrated the effective partnership between the universities and state agencies in bringing the science of flood modeling and mapping together with innovative design to create solutions for climate adaptation. However, it also revealed significant gaps in data availability to analyze the economic and social drivers for adopting different adaptation strategies. Furthermore, the accuracy of current flood mapping tools needs to be improved to predict future flooding at the municipal project scale. As Connecticut and other states move forward with resilience planning, continued investment in physical and social sciences at the local level will be necessary to effectively implement those plans.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85050", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85051" } }
{"authors":"Brian Duggan::University of South Carolina Columbia--Wayne Buckley::University of South Carolina--Michael Bizimis::University of South Carolina Columbia--Howie Scher::University of South Carolina Columbia--", "title":"PP41A-2226: Bulk Sediment Hf-Nd Isotopic Composition Across the EOT, Northern Hemisphere Glaciation?", "abstract":"In recent decades, near and far field proxies of continental ice production indicate the presence of continental ice on Antarctica. Short Antarctic glaciations blinked in and out of existence throughout the middle and late Eocene, culminating in the formation of a continental ice sheet during the Eocene Oligocene Transition (EOT; ~34 Ma). Moreover, the onset of the Antarctic glaciation coincides with pCO2 declining below a critical threshold for the accumulation of a continental ice sheet. New evidence suggesting bipolar glaciation (that is, northern and southern hemisphere) occurred through this period with ice sheets on Greenland and Antarctica. However, the pCO2 threshold for the accumulation of ice on Greenland is not reached until the late Oligocene. Preliminary hafnium-neodymium (Hf-Nd) isotope results of oxyhydroxide leachates from IODP Site U1411 on the Newfoundland Ridge points to increased weathering intensity coinciding with the EOT, marked by less radiogenic Hf isotope compositions. One interpretation of this data is that glaciation of the northern hemisphere (e.g. Greenland) coincides with that of Antarctica during the EOT. Hf-Nd isotopic composition of sediment on the Newfoundland ridge indicates a shift from incongruous chemical weathering to a more congruous mechanical weathering regime (i.e. glaciers). However, it could be suggested that the observed congruous Hf-Nd isotopic signal originates in the southern ocean and has been propagated north from the Antarctic. We are using sediment core from the equatorial Pacific to determine if a signal of glacial weathering could be transmitted though deep waters from Antarctica. The core, IODP Site 1333, is in the equatorial Pacific positioned far from either pole thus, a shift towards a less radiogenic Hf isotopic compositions is not to be expected. The absence of a shift in Hf isotopes in the oxydroxide leachates, or a shift of lesser magnitude, will strengthen the possibility of northern hemisphere glaciation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85051", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85053" } }
{"authors":"Andrew Szasz::University of California Santa Cruz--", "title":"ED13A-0884: We’re Pessimistic Because We Pay Too Much Attention to Climate Deniers", "abstract":"For some years, now, the forces of climate denial have had the upper hand in American political discourse about climate change. Denial seems to be everywhere, from the heights of official political power to the depths of anonymous trolls piling on the abuse in the “comment” sections of websites.  What can scientists do, in public discussions, in the classroom, to change the balance of forces?  One possibility is to point to the statements of powerful institutional actors that (a) have taken strong positions about the reality and seriousness of the climate threat, and (b) are not usually thought of as potential participants in environmental action. These include: the American military; the CIA and other elements of the national security apparatus; insurance and re-insurance firms (the largest “industry” in the world); and many of the great religions of the world, such as the Roman Catholic Church, “mainline” Protestant churches, the Greek Orthodox Church, and others.  In this presentation I review key statements from all of these “unexpected allies,” paying special attention particularly to statement from the great religions, and discuss how teaching about these in science classes can help students begin to think about how they can turn their scientific understanding into successful political engagements.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85053", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85054" } }
{"authors":"Sarah Brownlee::Wayne State University--Alexia Sarnowsky::Wayne State University--Laura Robles::Wayne State University--", "title":"T23E-07: Magnitude and symmetry of seismic anisotropy as a constraint on crustal composition and structure", "abstract":"Our ability to assess seismic hazard depends in large part on our understanding of the composition and structure of the crust, of which only the upper third can be directly sampled. For the middle and lower crust we must rely on our ability to interpret geophysical observations, including seismic anisotropy, to better understand composition and structure. Current methods of measuring crustal anisotropy use the assumption of transverse isotropic symmetry. While complicated, the symmetry of elastic properties of crustal materials has the potential to be used to help differentiate between materials of different composition. We present results of calculations of elastic tensors based on electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) measurements of mineral crystallographic preferred orientations (CPO) in crustal rocks from a number of locations, including new results from the Appalachian Mountains. Elastic tensors can be deconvolved into their main symmetry components to illustrate the importance of low-order symmetry in constraining rock type and composition. Initial results indicate that all crustal rock types with at least 5% anisotropy have a significant component of transverse isotropic (TI) symmetry, but many also have a significant component of orthorhombic symmetry. TI and orthorhombic components appear to be related to amounts of mica and amphibole, respectively. Because seismic methods assume TI symmetry, misfit in seismic inversion may in fact be a useful indicator of composition.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85054", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85055" } }
{"authors":"Kimberly Van Meter::University of Waterloo--Philippe Van Cappellen::University of Waterloo--Nandita Basu::University of Waterloo--", "title":"B53G-0657: Nitrogen Legacies in Agricultural Landscapes: A 150-year Longitudinal Study of the Susquehanna and Mississippi River Basins", "abstract":"Global flows of reactive nitrogen (N) have increased significantly over the last century in response to land-use change, agricultural intensification and elevated levels of atmospheric N. Although the use of commercial N fertilizers began to plateau in developed countries in the mid-1980s and despite widespread implementation of a range of conservation measures to mitigate the impacts of N-intensive agriculture, N concentrations in surface waters are in many cases remaining steady or continuing to increase. This lack of correlation between N inputs and outputs is increasingly being attributed to the presence of legacy N stores in subsurface reservoirs, with present-day concentrations being a function of inputs that are many decades old. It has remained unclear, however, what the magnitudes of such stores might be, and how they are partitioned between soil and groundwater reservoirs. In the present work, we have synthesized agricultural, population, and land-use data to develop a comprehensive, 150-year dataset of N inputs to the land surface of the continental United States. We have concurrently developed a parsimonious, process-based model that utilizes this N input trajectory to simulate biogeochemical transformations of N along subsurface pathways. Model results allow us predict the magnitudes of legacy N in soil and groundwater pools and to predict long-term stream N concentration trajectories over the last century and into the future. We have applied this modeling approach to two U.S. watersheds, the Mississippi River and Susquehanna River Basins, which are major sources of nutrient contamination to the Gulf of Mexico and Chesapeake Bay, respectively. Our results show significant stream N loading above baseline levels in both watersheds before the widespread use of commercial N fertilizers, largely due to 19th-century conversion of natural forest and grassland areas to row-crop agriculture. However, the temporal patterns of this loading differ between the two watersheds due to differences in trajectories of land-use change. Using the model, we estimate spatiotemporal patterns of N accumulation in both groundwater and soil organic matter in response to increases in N inputs to agricultural soil and explore future scenarios to predict changes in N-loading as a function of these N legacies.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85055", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85056" } }
{"authors":"Thomas Connolly::Moss Landing Marine Laboratories--Anthony Kirincich::Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution--", "title":"OS13B-2052: Fine-scale alongshore variability over the inner continental shelf revealed by fiber-optic distributed temperature sensing", "abstract":"The physical dynamics of the inner continental shelf determine the exchange of heat, nutrients, and other tracers between the nearshore environment and deeper ocean. At locations where the coastline and bathymetry are not uniform, there is likely to be significant exchange associated with with complex three-dimensional flow structures. Resolving such features in observations remains a challenge, particularly below the surface where satellites and high-frequency radar do not measure. To obtain high-resolution measurements of subsurface alongshore temperature variability during a field study on inner-shelf exchange, a fiber-optic distributed temperature sensing (DTS) system was deployed at the Martha’s Vineyard Coastal Observatory off the southern coast of New England. The DTS system emits a laser down a fiber-optic cable and measures the intensity of Raman backscatter at different frequencies, which provides an estimate of the surrounding ocean temperature at 1-m intervals along the cable. In this study, a 5-km fiber-optic cable was deployed along the seafloor at the 17-m isobath for a duration of over three months. The fine-scale measurements of temperature along the cable reveal sharp fronts that propagate along the bottom and are associated with rapid near-bottom cooling. When these features are present, which is only when the water column is stratified, their appearance is linked with the tidal cycle. The direction of propagation, calculated at a location where the cable turns inshore, has a significant alongshore component and suggests that the propagating fronts originate at a tidal mixing front where strong tidal currents flow over a shallow shoal. The fronts decay as they travel, indicating that they influence the alongshore thermal structure of the water column. These DTS observations provide a new perspective on the complex three-dimensional circulation associated with the combination of strong tides, stratification and shallow bathymetry.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85056", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85057" } }
{"authors":"Jennifer Blank::NASA Ames Research Center--", "title":"V11A-3049: Ca-Mg Carbonate Cements in Ophiolite-Hosted Creek Waters of the Del Puerto Ophiolite, CA, and their Potential Significance as a Planetary Biosignature", "abstract":"Serpentinization, the reaction at moderate pressure and temperature of water with olivine and pyroxene that are common in basalts and ultramafic rocks, results in the formation of alkaline fluids and the precipitation of a variety of secondary minerals. Terrestrial localities where active serpentinization is occurring are ideal Mars analogs for examining the characteristics of an environment that possesses two of the key features that we assume necessary to host life: water and an internally generated energy source. This study focuses on a related but different feature present where active serpentinization is occurring – namely, carbonate cements forming under plain air in the vicinity of Adobe Springs, CA. This site is located in the Del Puerto ophiolite about 150 km ESE of San Francisco, in the Coast Range of California. Two alkaline spring water compositions have been described at the site, a Ca-OH water (which is not currently being emitted by the active springs), and a Mg-CO3 water. Abundant dolomitic and calcitic carbonate cements are found in the creek drainages near the springs, associated with a diverse microbial community. We conducted a systematic study of the carbonate cements using SEM, EMP, XRD, TEM, and SIMS, focusing on sub-mm variations in texture, mineral chemistry and stable isotope (COH) composition. We compared our measurements with thermodynamic modeling results constrained by chemical analysis of water chemistry from the site and known partition coefficients and stable isotope fractionation factors. The wide range of carbonate compositions and textures observed at the Adobe Springs site suggests that more than one process is involved in their precipitation, including the possibility of microbially mediated dolomite mineralization. These carbonate cements could be a mineralogic biomarker of serpentinization and microbiological processes on Mars and other rocky planets and, therefore, prime targets for future astrobiological investigations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85057", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85059" } }
{"authors":"Katya Hafich::Institute of Arctic and Alpine Research University of Colorado Boulder--Wynn Martens::University of Colorado at Boulder--Hannah Fletcher::University of Colorado at Boulder--Barbara MacFerrin::University of Colorado at Boulder--Deb Morrison::Boulder Valley School District--Judith Stone::Boulder Valley School District--Mary Claire Collins::Boulder Valley School District--Michael Chastain::Delta County School District 50J--Carl Hager::Boulder Country Day School--Eileen Duncan::Union Colony Preparatory School--Cindy Gay::Steamboat Springs School District--J.D. Kurz::Archuleta School District #50--Cheryl Manning::JEFFCO Public Schools--Ben Graves::Delta County School District 50J--Lynn Bloomfield::Manitou Springs School District 14--", "title":"ED31F-05: Climate Literacy from the Plains to the Peaks: Challenges in Teaching Climate in Colorado Classrooms", "abstract":"Boulder, Colorado is a central hub of climate research and education resources, yet teachers less than two hours away struggle to find relevant climate curriculum and meaningful connections to climate scientists. Learn More About Climate (LMAC), an initiative of the CU-Boulder Office for Outreach and Engagement was created to provide access to the most up-to-date scientific research in a user-friendly way that raises awareness and inspires an informed dialogue about climate change among Coloradans. LMAC produces classroom ready videos highlighting CU climate scientists, offers classroom visits and Skype sessions with scientists, and serves as a hub for the most recent climate news. LMAC recently formed a Teacher Advisory Board made up of eleven K12 teachers from across Colorado spanning rural, suburban, and urban school districts. Given different locations, demographics, and grade levels, each teacher faces different challenges teaching climate. Here we present our work to identify the primary challenges that our teacher advisors have encountered while teaching climate science in their classrooms. Furthermore, we are working to co-create dynamic solutions with the teachers to address these problems using the LMAC platform.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85059", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85060" } }
{"authors":"June-Yi Lee::Pusan National University--Kyung-Ja Ha::Pusan National University--Pang-Chi Hsu::NUIST--Hyoeun Oh::Pusan National University--", "title":"OS52A-06: Dynamic and Thermodynamic Characteristics of the Two Dominant Boreal Summer Intraseasonal Oscillation Modes", "abstract":"The two dominant modes of boreal summer intraseasonal oscillation (BSISO) that influence onset and retreat of the Asian summer monsoon system and strongly modulate extreme rainfall events over Asia have been identified. One is the canonical northward propagating mode (BSISO1) with quasi-oscillating periods of 30-60 days and strong variance throughout the May to October period often in conjunction with the eastward Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO). The other is the northwestward propagating mode (BSISO2) with periods of 10-30 days during primarily the pre-monsoon and monsoon-onset season. This study investigates how the two modes are different from each other dynamically and thermodynamically. The BSISO1 circulation cells are more Rossby wave like with a northwest to southeast slope, whereas the circulation associated with the BSISO2 is more elongated and front-like with a southwest to northeast slope. The associated rainfall anomalies over the Indian monsoon and Western North Pacific region are out-of-phase in the BSISO1 but rather in-phase in the BSISO2. For both modes, moisture convergence plays more important role in development and propagation of BSISO than moisture advection but with different energetics. In the BSISO1, convective instability characterized by the low-level warm advection of moisture-laden air and upper-level cold advection of dry air is dominant but the baroclinic instability with warm-air rising and cold-air sinking tends to control the BSISO2. Phase-latitude composite analysis over the western North Pacific-East Asian region further indicates differences in intensification and propagation mechanism between the two modes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85060", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85061" } }
{"authors":"Daniel Gallton::University of Kansas--Jerry Manweiler::Fundamental Technologies, LLC--J. Douglas Patterson::Fundamental Technologies, LLC--Matina Gkioulidou::Applied Physics Laboratory Johns Hopkins--Lawrence Brown::Applied Physics Laboratory Johns Hopkins--Andrew Gerrard::New Jersey Institute of Technology--Aleksandr Ukhorskiy::Applied Physics Laboratory Johns Hopkins--Donald Mitchell::JHU/APL--Louis Lanzerotti::New Jersey Institute of Technology--", "title":"SM41E-2517: Overview of Radiation Belt Storm Probes Ion Composition Experiment (RBSPICE): Data Access and Science Results", "abstract":"The Van Allen Probes Mission includes the Radiation Belt Storm Probes Ion Composition Experiment (RBSPICE) energetic particle detectors, one on each of the two spacecraft. These detectors are performing in-situ observations of the Proton spectra (6.7 KeV thru 532 KeV), Helium spectra (33 KeV thru 584 KeV), Oxygen spectra (50 KeV thru 1.25 MeV), generic ion spectra (40 KeV thru 1 MeV), and electron spectra (20 KeV thru 1 MeV). While the primary target of the RBSPICE instruments is the ring current composition, the instruments are operational through all aspects of the orbit of each spacecraft. This poster presents a summary of the major RBSPICE science results as well as an overview of the highest level RBSPICE data products produced, the RBSPICE data visualization and analysis software, and links to access everything online.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85061", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85062" } }
{"authors":"Meghan Tomlin::Ocean Networks Canada--Reyna Jenkyns::Ocean Networks Canada--", "title":"IN11D-1797: Flexible Workflow Software enables the Management of an Increased Volume and Heterogeneity of Sensors, and evolves with the Expansion of Complex Ocean Observatory Infrastructures.", "abstract":"Ocean Networks Canada (ONC) collects data from observatories in the northeast Pacific, Salish Sea, Arctic Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, and land-based sites in British Columbia. Data are streamed, collected autonomously, or transmitted via satellite from a variety of instruments. The Software Engineering group at ONC develops and maintains Oceans 2.0, an in-house software system that acquires and archives data from sensors, and makes data available to scientists, the public, government and non-government agencies. The Oceans 2.0 workflow tool was developed by ONC to manage a large volume of tasks and processes required for instrument installation, recovery and maintenance activities. Since 2013, the workflow tool has supported 70 expeditions and grown to include 30 different workflow processes for the increasing complexity of infrastructures at ONC. The workflow tool strives to keep pace with an increasing heterogeneity of sensors, connections and environments by supporting versioning of existing workflows, and allowing the creation of new processes and tasks. Despite challenges in training and gaining mutual support from multidisciplinary teams, the workflow tool has become invaluable in project management in an innovative setting. It provides a collective place to contribute to ONC’s diverse projects and expeditions and encourages more repeatable processes, while promoting interactions between the multidisciplinary teams who manage various aspects of instrument development and the data they produce. The workflow tool inspires documentation of terminologies and procedures, and effectively links to other tools at ONC such as JIRA, Alfresco and Wiki. Motivated by growing sensor schemes, modes of collecting data, archiving, and data distribution at ONC, the workflow tool ensures that infrastructure is managed completely from instrument purchase to data distribution. It integrates all areas of expertise and helps fulfill ONC’s mandate to offer quality data to users.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85062", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85063" } }
{"authors":"Manal ELarab::Utah State University--Alfonso Torres::Utah Water Research Lab, Utah State University--Hector Nieto Solana::IAS-CSIC--William Kustas::USDA Agricultural Research Service New England Plant, Soil and Water Research Laboratory--Lisheng Song::Beijing Normal University--Joseph Alfieri::USDA Beltsville Agricultural Research Center--John Prueger::USDA ARS--Lynn McKee::USDA ARS--Martha Anderson::USDA ARS--Austin Jensen::Utah State University--Mac McKee::Utah State University--Maria Mar Alsina::University of California Davis--", "title":"H31J-06: Use of UAS Remote Sensing Data (AggieAir) to Estimate Crop ET at High Spatial Resolution", "abstract":"Estimation of the spatial distribution of evapotranspiration (ET) based on remotely sensed imagery has become useful for managing water in irrigated agricultural at various spatial scales. Currently, data acquired by conventional satellites (Landsat, ASTER, etc.) lack the needed spatial resolution to capture variability of interest to support evapotranspiration estimates. In this study, an unmanned aerial system (UAS), called AggieAirTM, was used to acquire high-resolution imagery in the visual, near infrared (0.15m resolution) and thermal infrared spectra (0.6m resolution). AggieAir flew over two study sites in Utah and Central Valley of California. The imagery was used as input to a surface energy balance model based on the Mapping Evapotranspiration with Internalized Calibration (METRIC) modeling approach. The discussion will highlight the ET estimation methodologies and the implications of having high resolution ET maps.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85063", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85064" } }
{"authors":"Jessica Mazzi::Portland State University--Shane Grigsby::University of Colorado at Boulder--Michael Goulden::University of California Irvine--Susan Ustin::University of California Davis--", "title":"B51H-0526: Estimating CO2 Fluxes Pre and Post Drought Using Remote Sensing Data in the Sierra Nevada Range", "abstract":"The recent California drought presents an opportunity to study CO2 flux changes over time due to insufficient water uptake by plant life using remote sensing data. Three flux towers were used to create linear regressions between AVIRIS derived Net Ecosystem Exchange (NEE = PRI * NDVI * PAR) and tower measured CO2 flux in the San Joaquin Experimental Range. To estimate CO2 from NEE, two linear regressions were used based on time of day and season, with R2 values of 0.85 and 0.87 respectively. Per-pixel CO2 flux was estimated for AVIRIS flights flown in June 2013, 2014, and 2015, as well as September 2011 and October 2014. There was a significant decrease in post drought photosynthetic CO2 uptake over the 6,700 km2 studied, totaling 2,977 grams per minute less (15.9% decrease) from June 2013 to June 2014. Data from the 2015 HyspIRI flights suggest a continuation of this trend for June 2015. Pre-drought conditions over a 33 km2 area show that the photosynthetic CO2 uptake dropped from 74 mg per minute on September 24, 2011, to 35 mg per minute on October 6, 2014 (a 53% decrease). HyspIRI flight lines also include 434 km2 of the Rim Fire, an area that saw a decrease in CO2 uptake of 413 grams per minute (71.7% decrease from June 2013 to June 2014) from the burn alone. It is estimated that the entire Rim Fire (1,041 km2) has caused a total decrease in photosynthetic CO2 uptake totaling 988 grams less per minute from 2013 to 2014, with some recovery evident in 2015.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85064", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85066" } }
{"authors":"Corinne Wong::Boston College--Jesse Nusbaumer::University of Colorado at Boulder--Jay Banner::University of Texas at Austin--", "title":"PP22A-05: Reconstructing climate processes driving variability in precipitation sources from mid to late Holocene speleothem δ18O records from the Southwest US", "abstract":"Independent co-variation of speleothem δ18O values and other moisture-sensitive speleothem proxies (e.g., growth rate, trace element concentrations) in recently published Holocene stalagmite records from Texas and New Mexico suggest a decoupling between precipitation amounts and precipitation sources over the southwest US. There is, however, limited understanding of the relation between precipitation sources and precipitation amounts and the climate processes governing variability in the region’s precipitation sources. To address this, we use source water tags to track precipitation derived from Pacific and Atlantic Oceans during a simulation of modern (1975-2013) climate. We find distinct patterns in the spatial distribution of the fraction of Pacific-derived winter precipitation are associated with unique atmospheric states. High pressure ridging reflected by 500 hPa geopotential heights result in weaker zonal winds and stronger northerly winds over the western US. Under these conditions, Pacific-derived moisture propagates further to the east, and Atlantic-derived moisture is suppressed over southern US. Conversely, 500 hPa geopotential heights that are latitudinally streamline result in strong zonal winds across the entire US. Under these conditions, the fraction of West Pacific-derived precipitation is limited to higher latitudes, and the fraction of far East Pacific- and Atlantic-derived precipitation is enhanced across the Southwest and Southern US, respectively. Further analysis of this data set will assess the teleconnections that link the distinct atmospheric conditions over the US with the state of the ocean and atmosphere over the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans. The results will be applied to reconstructing variability in the climate dynamics governing moisture transport to the southwest US during the mid to late Holocene as reflected by speleothem δ18O records in the region.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85066", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85068" } }
{"authors":"James Elkins::NOAA/ESRL Global Monitoring Division--Jon Nance::Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences NOAA/ESRL Global Monitoring Division--Geoff Dutton::Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences NOAA/ESRL Global Monitoring Division--Stephen Montzka::NOAA/ESRL Global Monitoring Division--Brad Hall::NOAA/ESRL Global Monitoring Division--Ben Miller::Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences NOAA/ESRL Global Monitoring Division--James Butler::NOAA/ESRL Global Monitoring Division--Debra Mondeel::Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences NOAA/ESRL Global Monitoring Division--Carolina Siso::Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences--Fred Moore::NOAA/ESRL Global Monitoring Division Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences--Eric Hintsa::Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences NOAA/ESRL Global Monitoring Division--Steven Wofsy::Harvard University--Matthew Rigby::University of Bristol--", "title":"A51N-0267: Using box models to quantify zonal distributions and emissions of halocarbons in the background atmosphere.", "abstract":"The Halocarbons and other Atmospheric Trace Species (HATS) of NOAA’s Global Monitoring Division started measurements of the major chlorofluorocarbons and nitrous oxide in 1977 from flask samples collected at five remote sites around the world. Our program has expanded to over 40 compounds at twelve sites, which includes six in situ instruments and twelve flask sites. The Montreal Protocol for Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer and its subsequent amendments has helped to decrease the concentrations of many of the ozone depleting compounds in the atmosphere. Our goal is to provide zonal emission estimates for these trace gases from multi-box models and their estimated atmospheric lifetimes in this presentation and make the emission values available on our web site. We plan to use our airborne measurements to calibrate the exchange times between the boxes for 5-box and 12-box models using sulfur hexafluoride where emissions are better understood.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85068", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85069" } }
{"authors":"Luis Eduardo Vieira::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Alisson Dal Lago::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Braulio Albuquerque::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Bruno Castilho::LNA - Laboratório Nacional de Astrofísica--Fernando Guarnieri::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Flavia Cardoso::Universidade de São Paulo--Gustavo Guerrero::UFMG Federal University of Minas Gerais--Jenny Rodríguez::National Institute for Space Research (INPE)--Jesulino Santos::LNA - Laboratório Nacional de Astrofísica--Joaquim Costa::National Institute for Space Research (INPE)--Judith Palacios::University of Alcalá--Ligia da Silva::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Livia Alves::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Lucas Costa::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Marcelo Sampaio::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Marcos Dias Silveira::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Margarete Domingues::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Marlos Rockenbach::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Maria Aquino::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Maria Cristina Soares::UFMG Federal University of Minas Gerais--Maria Barbosa::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Odim Mendes::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Paulo Jauer::Inst Nac Pesquisas Espaciais--Renato Branco::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Renato Dallaqua::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Tardelli Ronan Coelho Stekel::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Tereza S. N. Pinto::National Institute for Space Research (INPE)--Varlei Menconi::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Vitor Souza::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Walter Gonzalez::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Nivaor Rigozo::INPE National Institute for Space Research--", "title":"SH13D-2462: Design review of the Brazilian Experimental Solar Telescope", "abstract":"The Brazilian’s National Institute for Space Research (INPE), in collaboration with the Engineering School of Lorena/University of São Paulo (EEL/USP), the Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG), and the Brazilian’s National Laboratory for Astrophysics (LNA), is developing a solar vector magnetograph and visible-light imager to study solar processes through observations of the solar surface magnetic field. The Brazilian Experimental Solar Telescope is designed to obtain full disk magnetic field and line-of-sight velocity observations in the photosphere. Here we discuss the system requirements and the first design review of the instrument. The instrument is composed by a Ritchey-Chrétien telescope with a 500 mm aperture and 4000 mm focal length. LCD polarization modulators will be employed for the polarization analysis and a tuning Fabry-Perot filter for the wavelength scanning near the Fe II 630.25 nm line. Two large field-of-view, high-resolution 5.5 megapixel sCMOS cameras will be employed as sensors. Additionally, we describe the project management and system engineering approaches employed in this project. As the magnetic field anchored at the solar surface produces most of the structures and energetic events in the upper solar atmosphere and significantly influences the heliosphere, the development of this instrument plays an important role in advancing scientific knowledge in this field. In particular, the Brazilian's Space Weather program will benefit most from the development of this technology. We expect that this project will be the starting point to establish a strong research program on Solar Physics in Brazil. Our main aim is to progressively acquire the know-how to build state-of-art solar vector magnetograph and visible-light imagers for space-based platforms.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85069", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85070" } }
{"authors":"Tung Nguyen::Washington State University--Jennifer Adam::Washington State University--", "title":"H41A-1284: Impacts of Climate Change on Groundwater Recharge and Streamflow in Headwater Catchments in the Yakima River Basin", "abstract":"Headwater catchments are important sources of surface water supply, groundwater recharge and, thus, groundwater supply for agricultural activities in the Yakima River Basin (YRB, one of the most important agricultural basins in the western U.S). These catchments are, however, vulnerable to projected climate change in future decades, particularly if their runoff is dominated by snowmelt. The goal of this study is to assess the potential impacts of climate change on the temporal and spatial distributions of groundwater recharge and streamflow in three headwater catchments in the YRB. A Regional Hydro-Ecologic Simulation System (RHESSys) is calibrated and evaluated with a global optimization tool (Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy - CMA-ES) using 27 years of observation data from 1979 to 2005. Statistically downscaled climate projections for the 2050s from four global climate models driven by two different representative concentration pathways, RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 are used to predict future hydrologic changes. Our preliminary results show an increase in annual recharge between 2% and 13%, as well as in streamflow between 1% and 17%. Seasonal changes of recharge and streamflow are more pronounced with an increase up to 210% in winters and a decrease as high as 60% in summers in the 2050s. Both recharge and streamflow projections indicate timing shifts in all three catchments. The outcome from this study will be an integral part of a future study which investigates the impacts of climate change on surface water vulnerability due to supplemental pumping, potential recharge changes and related surface-groundwater interactions in the YRB using an integrated modeling approach that consists of three models: RHESSys, a groundwater model (MODFLOW) and a river and reservoir management model (RiverWare).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85070", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85071" } }
{"authors":"Bethany Ehlmann::California Institute of Technology--Daven Quinn::California Institute of Technology--", "title":"V51H-08: Hydrothermal and Diagenetic Mineralization on Mars", "abstract":"Predicted by geophysical modeling, the mineraolgic record of early Mars groundwater has only recently been discovered. First, rover exploration in sedimentary basins reveals diagenesis. At Meridiani, sandstone porosity is occluded by precipitation of secondary sulfates, hematite, and silica. Multiple alteration episodes are indicated by crystal vugs, disruption of preexisting textures by hematite concretions, and grain coatings (e.g. McLennan et al., 2005). At Gale crater, raised ridges in mudstones, interpreted to be early diagenetic features, are crossed by later-emplaced hydrated calcium sulfate veins (e.g. Grotzinger et al., 2014). Waters in Gale were likely circumneutral while jarosite mineralogy at Meridiani implies acidic waters. Second, systems of raised ridges at 100-m scale are observed from orbit in multiple Martian sedimentary rock units. An outstanding example is sulfate-bearing sediments exhumed at the northern margin of the Syrtis Major lavas (e.g. Quinn & Ehlmann, 2015). Polygonal and with no clearly preferred orientation, the ridges rise 5-30 m above the surrounding terrain. Parallel light-toned grooves with dark interiors (indicative of isopachous fills) and jarosite in ridge mineralogy point to mineralization by acidic waters. Third, some mineral assemblages observed from orbit represent the products of subsurface aqueous alteration at elevated temperatures (Ehlmann et al., 2011). These are globally distributed, exposed in scarps and by impact cratering. Mineral assemblages variously include (a) serpentine and carbonate; (b) prehnite and chlorite, and (c) zeolites. Collectively, these datasets indicate that groundwaters were spatially widespread on ancient Mars, contributing to the sustenance of lakes and to the alteration of bedrock to >1 km depths. While the Martian surface may have always been relatively inhospitable, a warmer, wetter subsurface provided a long-term potentially habitable environment. Key outstanding questions remaining include groundwater sources, their composition and compositional variability, and subsurface transport distances. Continued exploration of Mars, combined with studies of analogous bedrock mineralization on Earth, will advance understanding of environments with liquid water during Mars’ first billion years.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85071", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85072" } }
{"authors":"Jill McDermott::University of Toronto--Verena Heuer::Bremen University--Stefanie Tille::University of Toronto--James Moran::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory McMaster University--Greg Slater::McMaster University--Chelsea Sutcliffe::University of Toronto--Christopher Glein::University of Toronto--Kai-Uwe Hinrichs::MARUM - University of Bremen--Barbara Sherwood Lollar::University of Toronto--", "title":"B33B-0646: Abiogenic and Microbial Controls on Volatile Fatty Acids in Precambrian Crustal Fracture Waters", "abstract":"Saline fracture waters within the Precambrian Shield rocks of Canada and South Africa have been sequestered underground over geologic timescales up to 1.1-1.8 Ga [1, 2]. These fluids are rich in H2 derived from radiolysis and hydration of mafic and ultramafic rocks [1, 2, 3] and host a low-biomass, low-diversity microbial ecosystem at some sites [2]. The abiogenic or biogenic nature of geochemical processes has important implications for bioavailable carbon sources and the role played by abiotic organic synthesis in sustaining a chemosynthetic deep biosphere. Volatile fatty acids (VFAs) are simple carboxylic acids that may support microbial communities in such environments, such as those found in terrestrial [4] and deep-sea [5] hot springs. We present abundance and δ13C analysis for VFAs in a spectrum of Canadian Shield fluids characterized by varying dissolved H2, CH4, and C2+ n-alkane compositions. Isotope mass balance indicates that microbially mediated fermentation of carbon-rich graphitic sulfides may produce the elevated levels of acetate (39-273 μM) found in Birchtree and Thompson mine. In contrast, thermodynamic considerations and isotopic signatures of the notably higher acetate (1.2-1.9 mM), as well as formate and propionate abundances (371-816 μM and 20-38 μM, respectively) found at Kidd Creek mine suggest a role for abiogenic production via reduction of dissolved inorganic carbon with H2 for formate, and oxidation of C2+ n-alkanes for acetate and propionate, along with possible microbial cycling. VFAs comprise the bulk of dissolved and total organic carbon in the mines surveyed, and as such represent a potential key substrate for life. [1] Holland et al. (2013) Nature 497: 367-360. [2] Lin et al. (2006) Science 314: 479-482. [3] Sherwood Lollar et al. (2014) Nature 516: 379-382. [4] Windman et al. (2007) Astrobiology 7(6): 873-890. [5] Lang et al. (2010) Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 92: 82-99.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85072", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85074" } }
{"authors":"Christopher Trivedi::Colorado School of Mines--Graham Lau::University of Colorado at Boulder--Alexis Templeton::University of Colorado at Boulder--Stephen Grasby::Natural Resources Canada - Canadian Research Service--John Spear::Colorado School of Mines--", "title":"P11C-2105: Community Characterization of Microbial Populations Found at a Cold Water Sulfidic Spring in the Canadian High Arctic", "abstract":"The unique environment on Europa makes it an ideal target for astrobiological investigation. One such earth-based analogue to aid in this investigation is the sulfur-dominated glacial spring system found at Borup Fiord Pass (BFP), Ellesmere Island, Nunavut, Canada. In this system, subsurface microbial sulfate reduction produces hydrogen sulfide, which is transported through the glacier along spring channels [1]. As the surface oxidation of H2S occurs, resultant deposition of elemental sulfur (S0) and other minerals becomes visible (attached image). The energy released from these reactions can support potential microbial metabolisms and may be a valuable representation of microbial processes occurring on Europa. The resulting sulfur minerals provide sensitive records of dynamic atmospheric, geological, hydrological, chemical, and biological processes on planetary surfaces. Moreover, we expect that the S0-rich deposits of this glacial spring system will serve as a mineralogical record for biological activity and will provide a valuable tool for recognizing potential sulfur-based life on Europa. During a recent collaborative expedition (2014) to BFP, samples were taken from the toe of the glacier in an area called the ‘Blister Crust’ (attached image). At this location, glacial channels reach the surface, representing an active interface between subsurface and surface processes. Initial geochemical characterization at the site revealed high amounts of aqueous sulfide (1.8 mM) and hydrogen (29 nM), which likely serve as the electron donation potential in the system. Furthermore, preliminary 16S rRNA gene sequencing has shown a high abundance of the genus Sulfurimonas, which is a known sulfur metabolizer. Our research seeks to further characterize microbial communities found at this interface in order to elucidate information regarding in situ sulfur cycling and the potential to tie this into subsurface/surface processes on Europa. Continued work will provide guidance into potential astrobiological targets on the surface of Europa, predominantly in regions where subsurface fluids interact with surface icings. References: [1] Grasby S. E. et al. (2003) Astrobiology, 3(3), 583-596.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85074", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85075" } }
{"authors":"Lydia Olaka::University of Nairobi--", "title":"PP11B-2219: HOW CLOSED ARE CLOSED LAKES IN RIFTS? SIGNIFICANCE OF HYDRAULIC GRADIENTS FOR THE BUDGETS OF PALEO-LAKES IN EAST AFRICA", "abstract":"The hydrogeology of rift lakes is complex due to the potential influence of faults and porous volcanic and volcanoclastic media on groundwater flow. We conducted a comprehensive study that integrated geological and hydrogeological data as well as the application of a linear decay model to estimate the groundwater flow between the two of the best-studied lake systems in East Africa, the adjacent Lakes Naivasha and Nakuru- Elmenteita in the Central Kenya Rift. Whereas both lake basins host relatively shallow lakes today, paleo-shorelines and sediments suggest >100 m deep lakes during a wetter climate during the Early Holocene during the so-called African Humid Period. Stable isotope data show variations form highly depleted to more enriched d18O waters. The linear-reservoir depletion model simulates the decline of the Early Holocene lakes in both basins to the modern levels. The altitude difference of ca. 100 m of both paleo-lake levels enables us to estimate the duration of the groundwater decline and the connectivity of the two basins via the Eburru/Gilgil barrier. The results suggest a decline of the groundwater levels during ca. 5 kyrs if there is no recharge, and between 2-2.7 kyrs based on the modern recharge of 0.52 m/yr as the end members of the delay time introduced by subsurface water flow to the hydrology of the lake system. The latter value suggests that ca. 40.95 cubic kilometres of water flowed from Lake Naivasha to Nakuru- Elmenteita at maximum lake level in the Early Holocene following the hydraulic gradient concurrent to the topographic slope. The unexpectedly large volume, more than half of the volume of the paleo-Lake Naivasha during the Early Holocene, emphasizes the importance of groundwater in hydrological modelling of paleo-lakes in rifts. Moreover, the subsurface connectivity of rift lakes also causes a significant lag time to the system introducing a nonlinear component to the system that has to be considered while interpreting paleo-lake records.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85075", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85076" } }
{"authors":"Edward Plumb::National Weather Service Fairbanks--Sanmei Li::George Mason University Fairfax--Eric Holloway::NOAA National Weather Service Alaska-Pacific River Forecast Center--Eric Stevens::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Celine van Breukelen::Alaska-Pacific River Forecast Center - NWS--", "title":"NH51E-1954: River Ice and Flood Detection Products Derived from Suomi NPP VIIRS Satellite Data to Support Hydrologic Forecast Operations in Alaska", "abstract":"A lack of river ice data during spring break-up in Alaska creates many forecast challenges for National Weather Service (NWS) forecasters. Limited and infrequent ice conditions and flood observations are provided by river observers, community officials, and pilots. Although these observations are invaluable, there are extensive spatial and temporal data gaps across Alaska during spring break-up. The Suomi National Polar-orbiting Partnership (S-NPP) Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) satellite imagery has proved to be an extremely beneficial situational awareness and decision support tool for NWS forecast operations. In particular, the VIIRS satellite imagery became highly effective in identifying extensive flooding of many Alaskan rivers due to ice jams during the 2013 spring breakup season. A devastating ice jam flood in the Yukon River community of Galena prompted the development of river ice and flood detection products derived from the VIIRS satellite imagery with the support of the Joint Polar Satellite System/Proving Ground and Risk Reduction (JPSS/PGRR) Program. The two new products from S-NPP/VIIRS imagery provided critical decision making information to NWS forecasters responsible for issuing flood warnings for the region. Since 2013, the NWS continues to evaluate the use of these products in an operational forecast setting, and has expanded the evaluation period to include summertime flooding. There are limitations of these products due to cloud cover, sun zenith angles, product validation, and other issues unique to Alaska. The NWS will continue to provide feedback to the JPSS/PGRR Program in order to further refine and improve the algorithms used to create the river ice and flood detection products. This presentation will demonstrate how these products have been integrated into the NWS forecast process for several types of flood events in Alaska.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85076", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85077" } }
{"authors":"Pouya Vahmani::University of Southern California--George Ban-Weiss::University of Southern California--", "title":"B33E-0764: Satellite-Supported Modeling of the Relationships between Urban Heat Island and Land Use/Cover Changes", "abstract":"Reliable assessment of the primary causes of urban heat island (UHI) and the efficiency of various heat mitigation strategies requires accurate prediction of urban temperatures and realistic representation of land surface physical characteristics in models. In this study, we expand the capabilities of the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model and the Urban Canopy Model (UCM) by implementing high-resolution real-time satellite observations of green vegetation fraction (GVF), leaf area index (LAI), and albedo. We use MODIS-based GVF, LAI, and albedo to replace constant values that are assumed for urban pixels and climatological values that are used for non-urban pixels in the default WRF-UCM. Utilizing the improved model, summertime climate of Los Angeles is simulated over the span of three years (2010-2012). Next, thermal sensitivity of urban climate to anthropogenic land use/cover is assessed via replacing current urban cover with pre-development vegetation cover, consisting of shrubland and grassland. Surrounding undeveloped areas and inverse distance weighting method are utilized to estimate GVF and LAI of pre-development vegetation cover. Our analysis of diurnal and nocturnal surface and air temperatures shows cooling effects of urbanization in neighborhoods with high fractions of irrigated vegetation. However, urban warming is consistently detected over industrial/commercial and high-intensity residential areas. In addition to well-known mechanisms such as a shift in surface energy partitioning, high heat storage in urban material, and inefficiency of urban surfaces in transferring convective heat from the surface to the boundary layer, our results show decreased wind speed and sea breeze also contribute to the UHI intensity. We further evaluate the interactions between UHI and replacing irrigated and imported vegetation with non-irrigated native vegetation as a water conservation strategy in water-stressed Los Angeles metropolitan area.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85077", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85078" } }
{"authors":"Mohammad Adnan Rajib::Lyles School of Civil Engineering, Purdue University--Ahmad Tavakoly::Coastal and Hydraulics Laboratory, US Army Engineer Research and Development Center--Liuying Du::Lyles School of Civil Engineering, Purdue University--Venkatesh Merwade::Lyles School of Civil Engineering, Purdue University--Peirong Lin::Jackson School of Geosciences, University of Texas at Austin--", "title":"GC53B-1202: Comparison of streamflow prediction skills from NOAH-MP/RAPID, VIC/RAPID and SWAT toward an ensemble flood forecasting framework over large scales", "abstract":"Considering the differences in how individual models represent physical processes for runoff generation and streamflow routing, use of ensemble output is desirable in an operational streamflow estimation and flood forecasting framework. To enable the use of ensemble streamflow, comparison of multiple hydrologic models at finer spatial resolution over a large domain is yet to be explored. The objective of this work is to compare streamflow prediction skills from three different land surface/hydrologic modeling frameworks: NOAH-MP/RAPID, VIC/RAPID and SWAT, over the Ohio River Basin with a drainage area of 491,000 km2. For a uniform comparison, all the three modeling frameworks share the same setup with common weather inputs, spatial resolution, and gauge stations being employed in the calibration procedure. The runoff output from NOAH-MP and VIC land surface models is routed through a vector-based river routing model named RAPID, that is set up on the high resolution NHDPlus reaches and catchments. SWAT model is used with its default tightly coupled surface-subsurface hydrology and channel routing components to obtain streamflow for each NHDPlus reach. Model simulations are performed in two modes, including: (i) hindcasting/calibration mode in which the models are calibrated against USGS daily streamflow observations at multiple locations, and (ii) validation mode in which the calibrated models are executed at 3-hourly time interval for historical flood events. In order to have a relative assessment on the model-specific nature of biases during storm events as well as dry periods, time-series of surface runoff and baseflow components at the specific USGS gauging locations are extracted from corresponding observed/simulated streamflow data using a recursive digital filter. The multi-model comparison presented here provides insights toward future model improvements and also serves as the first step in implementing an operational ensemble flood forecasting framework for the entire Mississippi Basin.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85078", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85079" } }
{"authors":"Louise Kellogg::University of California - Davis--Marie Weisfeiler::University of California Davis--Donald Turcotte::University of California Davis--", "title":"DI31B-2604: Heating and Cooling in Small Undifferentiated Planetary Interiors", "abstract":"During the early stages of planetary formation in the solar system, the interior temperature of a growing planetesimal can rise until it exceeds the melt temperature, leading to planetary differentiation, for instance into a rocky mantle and iron-rich core. This growth and differentiation process likely occurs within the first 10 million years of solar system history. At this early stage, decay of short-lived isotopes provide a significant energy source. Cooling to space is accomplished by radiative heat loss, but little is known about the interior heating and cooling history prior to differentiation. Most previously published models for the thermal history of small bodies assume that heat is transferred by conduction from the interior. In the interiors of sufficiently large planetary bodies, solid-state convection will be the primary mechanism of heat transfer from the interior. Convection more efficiently removes heat from the interior; in this presentation we therefore examine whether solid-state convection in an undifferentiated body can influence the timeline for heating, cooling, and attaining the melt temperature. The onset of convection in a self-gravitating sphere of radius r, heated from within at a rate H, and cooled from the outside, was discussed by Chandrasekhar in 1961 and further developed, for a different application, by Hsui et al. (1972), who note that convection occurs when the Rayleigh number for a self-gravitating sphere exceeds 5783 for a sphere with a fixed surface boundary. Depending on the assumed viscosity as the melt temperature is approached, solid-state convection may occur for objects of less than 1000 km radius. Heating and cooling are transient phenomena governed by competing timescales including radioactive decay and convection. Thermal histories for different scenarios are developed using a finite element model.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85079", "section":"Earth's Deep Interior"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85080" } }
{"authors":"Yves Meheust::University of Rennes--Renaud Toussaint::EOST, CNRS--Grunde Lovoll::University of Oslo--Knut Jorgen Maloy::University of Oslo--", "title":"H21A-1333: Saffman-Taylor fingering: why it is not a proper upscaled model of viscous fingering in a (even two-dimensional) random porous medium", "abstract":"P.G. Saffman & G. Taylor (1958) studied the stability of the interface between two immiscible fluids of different densities and viscosities when one displaces the other inside a Hele-Shaw (HS) cell. They showed that with a horizontal cell and if the displaced fluid is the more viscous, the interface is unstable and leads to a viscous fingering which they nearly fully modeled [1]. The HS geometry was introduced as a geometry imposing the same flow behavior as the Darcy-scale flow in a two-dimensional (2D) porous medium, and therefore allowing an analogy between the two configurations. This is however not obvious, since capillary forces act at very different scales in the two. Later, researchers performing unstable displacement experiments in HS cells containing random 2D porous media also observed viscous fingering at large viscosity ratios, but with invasion patterns very different from those of Saffman and Taylor (ST) [2-3]. It was however considered that the two processes were both Laplacian growth processes, i.e., processes in which the invasion probability density is proportional to the pressure gradient. Ten years ago, we investigated viscously-unstable drainage in 2D porous media experimentally and measured the growth activity as well as occupation probability maps for the invasion process [4-5]. We concluded that in viscous fingering in 2D porous media, the activity was rather proportional to the square of the pressure gradient magnitude (a so-called DBM model of exponent 2), so that the universality class of the growth/invasion process was different from that of ST viscous fingering. We now strengthen our claim with new results based on the comparison of (i) pressure measurements with the pressure field around a finger such as described by the ST analytical model, and (ii) branching angles in the invasion patterns with those expected for DBMs of various exponents. [1] Saffman, P. G. and Taylor, G. Proc. Soc. London 1958(Ser A 245), 312-329. [2] Lenormand, R. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 1990(2), SA79. [3] Måløy, K. J., Feder, J. & Jøssang, T. Viscous fingering fractals in porous media, PRL 1985(55), 2688-2691. [4] Løvoll, G.; Méheust, Y.; Toussaint, R.; Schmittbuhl, J. & Måløy, K. J. PRE 2004(70), 026301. [5] Toussaint, R.; Løvoll, G.; Méheust, Y.; Schmittbuhl, J. & Måløy K. J., EPL 2005(71), 583-589.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85080", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85082" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"H33A-1569: Developing a Decision Support System for Flood Response: NIMS/ICS Fundamentals", "abstract":"Effective response to regional disasters such as floods requires a multipronged, non-linear approach to reduce loss of life, property and harm to the environment. These coordinated response actions are typically undertaken by multiple jurisdictions, levels of government, functional agencies and other responsible entities. A successful response is highly dependent on the effectiveness and efficiency of each coordinated response action undertaken across a broad spectrum of organizations and activities. In order to provide a unified framework for those responding to incidents or planned events, FEMA provides a common and flexible approach for managing incidents, regardless of cause, size, location or complexity, referred to as the National Incident Management System (NIMS). Integral to NIMS is the Incident Command System (ICS), which establishes a common, pre-defined organizational structure to ensure coordination and management of procedures, resources and communications, for efficient incident management. While being both efficient and rigorous, NIMS, and ICS to a lesser extent, is an inherently complex framework that requires significant amount of training for planners, responders and managers to master, especially considering the wide array of incident types that Local Emergency Planning Committees (LEPCs) must be prepared to respond to. The existing Water-Wizard Decision Support System (DSS), developed to support water distribution system recovery operations for Decontamination (Decon), Operational Optimization (WDS), and Economic Consequence Assessment (Econ), is being evolved to integrate incident response functions. Water-Wizard runs on both mobile and desktop devices, and is being extended to utilize smartphone and mobile device specific data streams (e.g GPS location) to augment its fact-base in real-time for situational-aware DSS recommendations. In addition, the structured NIMS and ICS frameworks for incident management and response are being incorporated into the Water-Wizard knowledgebase, with a mid-term goal of integrating flood-specific emergency response domain knowledge to provide a real-time flood responder decision support.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85082", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85083" } }
{"authors":"Laura Meredith::Stanford University--Kristin Boye::Stanford Earth Sciences--Mary Whelan::University of California Merced Carnegie Institution for Science--Erin Pang::Stanford University--Christian von Sperber::Stanford University--Nicolas Brueggemann::Forschungszentrum Juelich GmbH--Joe Berry::Carnegie Institution for Science--Paula Welander::Stanford University--", "title":"B22E-03: Microbial, Physical and Chemical Drivers of COS and 18O-CO2 Exchange in Soils", "abstract":"Carbonyl sulfide (COS) and the oxygen isotope composition (δ18O) of CO2 are potential tools for differentiating the contributions of photosynthesis and respiration to the balance of global carbon cycling. These processes are coupled at the leaf level via the enzyme carbonic anhydrase (CA), which hydrolyzes CO2 in the first biochemical step of the photosynthetic pathway (CO2 + H2O ⇌ HCO3- + H+) and correspondingly structural analogue COS (COS + H2O → CO2 + H2S). CA also accelerates the exchange of oxygen isotopes between CO2 and H2O leading to a distinct isotopic imprint [1]. The biogeochemical cycles of these tracers include significant, yet poorly characterized soil processes that challenge their utility for probing the carbon cycle. In soils, microbial CA also hydrolyze COS and accelerate O isotope exchange between CO2 and soil water. Soils have been observed to emit COS by undetermined processes. To account for these soil processes, measurements are needed to identify the key microbial, chemical, and physical factors. In this study, we survey COS and δ18O exchange in twenty different soils spanning a variety of biomes and soil properties. By comparing COS fluxes and δ18O-CO2 values emitted from moist soils we investigate whether the same types of CA catalyze these two processes. Additionally, we seek to identify the potential chemical drivers of COS emissions by measuring COS fluxes in dry soils. These data are compared with soil physical (bulk density, volumetric water content, texture), chemical (pH, elemental analysis, sulfate, sulfur K-edge XANES), and microbial measurements (biomass and phylogeny). Furthermore, we determine the abundance and diversity of CA-encoding genes to directly link CA with measured soil function. This work will define the best predictors for COS fluxes and δ18O-CO2 values from our suite of biogeochemical measurements. The suitability of identified predictor variables can be tested in follow-up studies and applied for modeling purposes. References: [1] Von Sperber, C., Weiler, M. and Brüggemann, N.: The effect of soil moisture, soil particle size, litter layer and carbonic anhydrase on the oxygen isotopic composition of soil-released CO2, Eur. J. Soil Sci., 66(3), doi:10.1111/ejss.12241, 2015.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85083", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85084" } }
{"authors":"Takumi Hayashida::Building Research Institute--Masayuki Yoshimi::Geological Survey of Japan--", "title":"S41B-2723: Verification of Green’s Function Approximation from Ambient Noise Cross-correlation using Three-year Continuous Seismic Data in South Niigata Prefecture, Japan", "abstract":"A continuous broadband-to-strong motion observation network that consists of 15 stations has been in operation since September 2011 in south Niigata Prefecture (Yoshimi et al., 2012). We applied seismic interferometry to the ambient noise data for the purpose of validating three-dimensional S-wave velocity structure (deep sedimentary structure) models beneath the observation area (Hayashida and Yoshimi, 2012, 2015). We used 37-month ambient noise data (October 2011 - October 2014) to obtain nine component (RR, TT, ZZ, RT, TR, ZR, ZT, RZ, and TZ) cross-correlation functions between two stations (105 station pairs) for distances from 4.3 to 40.7 km, according to the signal processing technique by Bensen et al. (2007). Our results show that signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs) of cross-correlation functions increase logarithmically as the stacking number increase and the wave trains are clear especially for TT and ZZ correlations. Some station pairs show large SNRs even for RT and TR correlations, indicating complicated velocity structure beneath the area. To extract Rayleigh-wave Green’s functions efficiently, we applied body and surface wave separation technique by Takagi et al. (2014). We obtained clear dispersion curves of Rayleigh and Love waves in the frequency range between 0.1 and 1.0 Hz that correspond well to theoretical curves from existing velocity structure model of Sekiguchi et al. (2009). We found that maximum detectable wavelength of surface wave is nearly equivalent to station-to-station distance for near station pairs (< 20 km), whereas the maximum wavelength is about a half of station-to-station distance for further station pairs. We also investigated the effectiveness of uniform noise source distribution assumptions by comparing hourly stacked complex coherence functions of ambient noise between neighboring two stations and theoretical Bessel functions of the of first kind of zero order with the existing crustal (Takeda et al., 2012) and deep sedimentary structure models (Sekiguchi et al., 2009). The comparisons show good agreements in the frequency range between 0.05 and 0.3 Hz, indicating uniform noise source distribution in the observation period. Acknowledgements: Continuous observations until March 2014 were funded by Japan Nuclear Safety Organization (JNES).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85084", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85085" } }
{"authors":"Jeffrey Vervoort::Washington State University--Anthony Kemp::University Western Australia--Chris Fisher::Washington State University--Ann Bauer::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--Samuel Bowring::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--", "title":"V43D-05: The Rock Record Has It About Right—No Significant Continental Crust Formation Prior to 3.8 Ga", "abstract":"Although limited in its exposed extent and by its quality of preservation, the geologic record through the first two billion years of Earth’s history provides surprisingly tight constraints on the growth and evolution of continental crust. The magmatic zircon record for this period is dominated by Neoarchean U-Pb ages, with greatly diminishing abundance of older rocks and no known zircon bearing rocks much older than 4.0 Ga. A similar pattern exists for the ages of detrital zircons but with important addition of zircons as old as 4.4 Ga, mostly from the Jack Hills metaconglomerate. It has been suggested that this represents an artefact of preservation rather than the actual production rate of older crust, with the implication that large volumes of older crust have been destroyed by various recycling processes. This undoubtedly has happened to some extent, but there is considerable uncertainty as to how much has been destroyed and the nature of the early-formed crust. Here is where the long-lived radiogenic isotopic record, particularly Lu-Hf, can provide important information on the sources of the zircons by integrating age and tracer isotopic information in not only the same sample or zircon but even in the same domain of zircon. Using the most robust data from zircon and whole rock samples, excluding those with unconstrained ages and mixed-domain analyses, the most radiogenic Hf isotope compositions are characterized by ~ chondritic Hf isotopic compositions from 4.4 to ~ 3.8 Ga and a nearly linear evolution trend from epsilon Hf of 0 at 3.8 Ga to ~ epsilon Hf of +16 at present. There remains no evidence from the Hf isotope record for widespread mantle depletion prior to 3.8 Ga. Excluding the Jack Hills zircons, there is a conspicuous lack of pre 3.9 Ga zircons in even the oldest sediments1. This indicates that crust prior to 3.8 Ga was likely small in volume and/or effectively recycled back into the mantle on short time scales and did not result in significant depletion of the mantle. The onset of widespread mantle depletion at ~ 3.8 Ga likely coincided with the formation of stable continental crust (and cratons). [1]Nutman et al (2001). Precambrian Res, 105, 93-114.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85085", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85086" } }
{"authors":"Linda Deck::Los Alamos National Laboratory--Francesca Samsel::University of Texas at Austin--Cathy Wilson::Los Alamos National Laboratory--Mireya Rodriguez-Acosta::Los Alamos National Laboratory--", "title":"PA21A-2157: Using the Arts as a Bridge to Public Understanding of Data-Intensive Earth Science Research through Climate Prisms: The Arctic", "abstract":"An ever-growing body of research in Informal Science Education is showing that the arts contribute greatly to engaging the free-choice science learner. This kind of learning goes on outside of the classroom, notably in science centers and museums, where novel, experiential approaches can be piloted. A new exhibit, Climate Prisms: The Arctic, is being mounted by a team of artists and scientists at the Bradbury Science Museum of Los Alamos National Laboratory. It presents the pipeline from collecting soil samples in the Arctic to analyzing them in the labs to the statistical analysis of the findings and on to the input into the climate model, using prisms of art: visual art, poetry, scientific text, information graphics, field imagery and others. The presentation encourages users to view Arctic science through these different lenses. Each person plots their own path, moving through the content at the pace and level that best enables them to engage with the material. With the entry points through multiple artistic voices, learners hearts and feelings are directly reached, building primarily affective connections and then curiosity, rather than cognitive. The project itself is a large display screen driven by a touch interface designed for individual or small group viewing. Content paths are determined by an underlying system of tags, levels, content categories and related research areas. A screen shows a set of images. Each image can be accessed to provide image-specific information or can be a launching pad for a new set of related content and images that allows the user to continue on their exploration journey. Each person, each time they visit, creates a unique path through over 2000 pieces of content according to the unique set of learning assets and interests they bring with them at that visit. Embedded assessment will log basic demographics and each individual foray through the content. These assessments will be analyzed to explore trends of use and drive further content development.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85086", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85087" } }
{"authors":"Steven Larcom::North Carolina State University Raleigh--Shane Grigsby::University of Colorado at Boulder--Susan Ustin::University of California Davis--", "title":"NH54A-03: Assessing the Potential Impact of the 2015-2016 El Niño on the California Rim Fire Burn Scar Through Debris Flow Hazard Mapping", "abstract":"Wildfires are a perennial issue for California, and the current record-breaking drought is exacerbating the potential problems for the state. Fires leave behind burn scars characterized by diminished vegetative cover and abundant bare soil, and these areas are especially susceptible to storm events that pose an elevated risk of debris flows and sediment-rich sheet wash. This study focused on the 2013 Rim Fire that devastated significant portions of Stanislaus National Forest and Yosemite National Park, and utilized readily available NASA JPL SRTM elevation data and AVIRIS spectral imaging data to construct a debris flow hazard map that assesses mass wasting risk for the Rim Fire burn scar. This study consisted entirely of remotely sensed data, which was processed in software programs such as ENVI, GRASS GIS, ArcMap, and Google Earth. Parameters that were taken into consideration when constructing this map include hill slope (greater than 30 percent rise), burn severity (assessed by calculating NDVI), and erodibility of the soil (by comparing spectral reflectance of AVIRIS images with the reference spectra of illite). By calculating percent of total burn area, 6% was classified as low risk, 55% as medium risk, and 39% as high risk. In addition, this study assessed the importance of the 2015-2016 El Niño, which is projected to be one of the strongest on record, by studying historic rainfall records and storm events of past El Niño's. Hydrological and infrastructural problems that could be caused by short-term convective or long-term synoptic storms and subsequent debris flows were explored as well.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85087", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85088" } }
{"authors":"James White::University of Otago--Greg Valentine::University at Buffalo--", "title":"V33B-3108: Magmatic versus phreatomagmatic fragmentation: absence of evidence is not evidence of absence", "abstract":"What are the fragmentation processes in volcanic eruptions? At meetings like this sessions ask ` what can pyroclasts tell us?`  and the answer is mostly ` the properties of the magma at the point of solidification.`  The only place a pyroclast can preserve a fragmentation signature is at its surface, as the fracture or interface that made it a fragment. Commonly contrasted are ` phreatomagmatic`  and ` magmatic`  fragmentation in eruptions. Strictly, the latter means only fragmentation of magma without external water, but it often carries the connotation of disruption by bubbles of magmatic gas. Phreatomagmatic fragmentation implies a role for external water in fragmenting the magma, including vaporization and expansion of water as steam with rapid cooling/quenching of the magma. Magma is necessarily involved in phreatomagmatic fragmentation, and a common approach to assessing whether a pyroclast formed by magmatic or phreatomagmatic fragmentation is to make a stepwise assessment. This often uses particle vesicularity (high=magmatic), shape of particles (blocky=phreatomagmatic), degree of quenching (high=phreatomagmatic), or a glassy fluidal exterior film on particles (present=magmatic). It is widely known that no single one of these criteria is entirely diagnostic and other criteria are often considered, such as welding (=magmatic), particle aggregation (=phreatomagmatic), lithic-fragment abundance (high=phreatomagmatic), and proportion of fines (high=phreatomagmatic). Magmatic fragmentation varies, and even without water can yield anything from rhyolite pumice to obsidian to basaltic achneliths or carbonatitic globules. This makes direct argument for magmatic fragmentation difficult, and many papers have taken an alternative approach: they have ` tested`  for phreatomagmatism using the fingerprints listed above, and if the fingerprint is lacking a magmatic fragmentation process is considered to be ` proven` . In other words, absence of evidence for phreatomagmatic fragmentation is taken as evidence of its absence. We argue that this approach is fundamentally invalid, that the criteria used are typically incorrect or incorrectly applied, and that for many, perhaps most, deposits it may not be possible to determine the fragmentation process at all given our current state of knowledge.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85088", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85089" } }
{"authors":"Bhaswar Sen::Organization Not Listed--Greg Lee::Northrop Grumman Space Technology--Ronald Polidan::Northrop Grumman Space Technology--", "title":"P11B-2100: Lifting Entry & Atmospheric Flight (LEAF) Applications at Solar System Bodies.", "abstract":"Introduction: Northrop Grumman and L’Garde have continued the development of a hypersonic entry, maneuverable platform capable of performing long-duration (months to a year) in situ and remote measurements at any solar system body that possesses an atmosphere. The Lifting Entry & Atmospheric Flight (LEAF) family of vehicles achieve this capability by using a semi-buoyant, ultra-low ballistic coefficient vehicle whose lifting entry allows it to enter the atmosphere without an aeroshell. In this presentation, we discuss the application of the LEAF system at various solar system bodies: Venus, Titan, Mars, and Earth. We present the key differences in platform design as well as operational differences required by the various target environments. The Venus implementation includes propulsive capability to reach higher altitudes during the day and achieves full buoyancy in the “habitable layers” of Venus’ atmosphere at night. Titan also offers an attractive operating environment, allowing LEAF designs that can target low, medium, or high altitude operations, also with propulsive capabilities to roam within each altitude regime. The Mars version is a glider that descends gradually, allowing targeted delivery of payloads to the surface. Finally, an Earth version could remain in orbit in a stowed state until activated, allowing rapid response type deployments to any region of the globe.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85089", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85090" } }
{"authors":"Scott French::University of California Berkeley--Mr Prabhat::University of California Berkeley--Dáithí Stone::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Xiaolan Wang::Environment Canada Toronto--Michael Wehner::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--William Collins::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--", "title":"GC23C-1163: Detection and Attribution of Extra-Tropical Cyclone activity in CMIP-5", "abstract":"Science Motivation Extra-Tropical Cyclones (ETCs) are a key mechanism for the transport of energy and moisture in the atmosphere. ETCs have an impact on water supply and natural hazards (flooding caused because of high precipitation, storm surges, high winds, etc). The characterization of how ETC activity (both frequency and intensity) will change in the future under global warming scenarios is an important line of investigation. Methods In this work, we apply the Toolkit for Extreme Climate Analytics (TECA) for extracting ETC patterns in massive climate archives. We implement a pattern detection procedure outlined by Wang, et al. that identifies local pressure minima with a threshold on pressure gradient. We have successfully scaled this code to process the entire CMIP-5 archive in one shot on 750,000 cores on the Mira, BG/Q system. We extract storm track counts, and track densities from the resulting analysis. The output of the climate model simulations is compared against observed extra-tropical cyclone behaviour using the multiple linear regression analysis commonly used in detection and attribution studies. Various metrics of frequency and location are analysed, both on global and ocean-basin scales. Datasets We process all CMIP-5 models under the historicalNAT, historical and rcp8.5 scenarios. We also process major reanalysis products (ERA-Interim, 20CR, NCEP2, NCEP-CFSR-0.5 and NCEP-CFSR-2.5).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85090", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85091" } }
{"authors":"Brendan Dyck::University of Oxford--Marc St Onge::Geological Survey of Canada--David Waters::University of Oxford--Michael Searle::University of Oxford--", "title":"V41A-3057: Muscovite-Dehydration Melting: A Textural Study of a Key Reaction in Transforming Continental Margin Strata Into a Migmatitic Orogenic Core ", "abstract":"Metamorphosed continental margin sedimentary sequences, which comprise the dominant tectonostratigraphic assemblage exposed in orogenic hinterlands, are crucial to understanding the architecture and evolution of collisional mountain belts. This study explores the textural effect of anatexis in amphibolite-grade conditions and documents the mineral growth mechanisms that control nucleation and growth of K-feldspar, sillimanite and silicate melt. The constrained textural evolution follows four stages: 1) Nucleation – K-feldspar is documented to nucleate epitaxially on isomorphic plagioclase in quartzofeldspathic (psammitic) domains, whereas sillimanite nucleates in the Al-rich (pelitic) domain, initially on [001] mica planes. The first melt forms at the site of muscovite breakdown. 2) Chemically driven growth – In the quartzofeldspathic domain, K-feldspar progressively replaces plagioclase by a K+ - Na+ cation transfer reaction, driven by the freeing of muscovite-bound K+ during breakdown of the mica. Sillimanite forms intergrowths with the remaining hydrous melt components, contained initially in ovoid clots. 3) Merge and coarsening - With an increase in pressure, melt and sillimanite migrate away from clots along grain boundaries. A melt threshold is reached once the grain-boundary network is wetted by melt, increasing the length-scale of diffusion, resulting in grain boundary migration and grain-size coarsening. The melt threshold denotes the transition to an open-system on the lithology scale, where melt is a transient phase. 4) Residual melt crystallization – Residual melt crystallizes preferentially on existing peritectic grains as anatectic quartz, plagioclase, and K-feldspar. As the system cools and closes, grain growth forces melt into the intersections of grain-boundaries, recognized as irregular shaped melt films, or as intergrowths of the volatile-rich phases (i.e. Tur-Ms-Ap). In the Himalayan metamorphic core these processes result in the formation of: pelitic K-feldspar augen gneiss, stockwork leucogranites, and an effective strengthening of the hinterland, as evidenced by a switch in tectonic deformation style, from thin-skinned cover sequence thrust imbrication and folding to out-of-sequence basement-involved thick-skinned thrusting and folding.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85091", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85092" } }
{"authors":"Rodrigo Fernandez::ICHARM International Centre for Water Hazard And Risk Management--Takahiro Sayama::Disaster Prevention Research Institute, Kyoto University--", "title":"H43I-1673: Classification of River Basins by Recurrent Temporal Patterns of Storage and Runoff", "abstract":"Hydrological functions of river basins are summarized as collection, storage and runoff generation, which can be characterized by the dynamics of hydrological variables including precipitation, evaporation, storage and runoff. The temporal patterns of each variable can be indicators of the functionality of a basin. In this paper we introduce a measure to quantify the degree of similarity in intra-annual variations at monthly scale at different years for the four main variables. We introduce this measure under the term of recurrence and define it as the degree to which a monthly hydrological variable returns to the same state in subsequent years. The degree of recurrence in runoff is important not only for the management of water resources but also for the understanding of hydrologic processes, especially in terms of how the other three variables determine the recurrence in runoff. The main objective of this paper is to propose a simple hydrologic classification framework based on the combinations of recurrence in the four variables using a monthly scale time series. We evaluate it with lagged autocorrelation (AC), fast Fourier transforms (FFT) and Colwell’s indices of variables. By setting a threshold to define high or low recurrence in the four variables, we classify each river basin into 16 possible classes. According to the river basin classification, 10 out of the 16 possible classes were present in the 35 largest river basins in the world. In the humid tropic region, the basins belong to a class with high recurrence in all the variables, while in the subtropical region many of the river basins have low recurrence. In the temperate region, the energy limited or water limited in summer characterizes the recurrence in storage, but runoff exhibits generally low recurrence due to the low recurrence in precipitation. Our proposed framework follows a simple methodology that can aid in grouping river basins with similar characteristics of water, energy and storage cycles. The framework is applicable at different scales with different data sets to provide useful insights into the understanding of hydrologic regimes based on the classification.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85092", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85093" } }
{"authors":"Kathleen Ritterbush::University of Chicago--Sean Loyd::California State University Fullerton--Frank Corsetti::University of Southern California--David Bottjer::University of Southern California--William Berelson::University of Southern California--", "title":"PP33C-2335: Examining early-diagenetic processes as a chief sink for carbonate in the aftermath of the Triassic-Jurassic crisis: Hettangian concretions of Muller Canyon, NV, USA", "abstract":"Tectonic, climate, and biotic changes across the Triassic-Jurassic transition appear to have resulted in a “carbonate gap” in the rock record of many shallow marine environments. Ecological state changes documented in near-shore settings in both Tethys and Panthassa show an earliest Jurassic switch to sponge-dominated biosiliceous sedimentation regimes. The Sunrise Formation exposed in the Gabbs Valley Range of Nevada (USA) records a peculiar juxtaposition of Hettangian carbonate-rich strata that contain demosponge spicules as the primary bioclast. It is unclear 1) why biocalcifiers were not recorded in higher abundance in this near-shore back-arc basin setting; 2) why carbonates formed following a biosiliceous regime; and 3) what the lithology indicates about post-extinction marine geochemical dynamics. Detailed sedimentological, paleontological, and geochemical analyses were applied to a 20-m thick sequence of limestone and chert in the Muller Canyon area, which is the Auxiliary Stratotype for the Triassic/Jurassic boundary. Concretion anatomy, bioclast microfacies, and oxygen and carbon isotopic signatures all indicate the Hettangian limestones are chiefly diagenetic concretions that all formed very shallowly, some essentially at the sediment-water interface. We infer that local bottom waters and/or pore waters were supersaturated with respect to calcium carbonate and that this contributed to widespread concretion sedimentation independent of biomineralization. Ecological incumbency of the demosponge meadows may have been supported by concurrent augmentation of marine silica concentration and this apparently proved inhospitable to re-colonization of benthic biocalcifying macrofauna. Together the biotic and lithologic consequences of the extinction represent million-year scale ecological restructuring and highlight early diagenetic precipitation as a major sink in long-term regional carbonate cycling. Perhaps the widespread ‘carbonate gap’ is actually a gap in calcifying macrofauna and the ocean managed to dump alkalinity as diagenetic carbonate.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85093", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85094" } }
{"authors":"Maya Almaraz::Brown University--Stephen Porder::Brown University--Peter Groffman::Cary Inst Ecosystem Studies--", "title":"B13G-0704: Nitrogen fertilizer increases nitrous oxide, but not dinitrogen, emissions from moist tropical forest soils in Puerto Rico", "abstract":"Nitrogen (N) deposition in tropical forests may increase substantially in coming decades, stimulating a concomitant increase of soil N gas emissions (dinitrogen (N2), nitrous (N2O) and nitric oxides). How N deposition might alter the relative emissions of these gases is unclear, and has ramifications for the global climate since N2O is a potent greenhouse gas. We used a small-scale fertilization study in the Luquillo Experimental Forest (LEF) of Puerto Rico to simulate the effects of N deposition on N gas emissions. Fertilizer was applied by placing mesh bags filled with ammonium saturated weak cation exchange resin directly on the mineral soil for two months. At that time, intact soil cores (0-10cm) were taken from below the bags. The cores were shipped to the Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, where they were incubated in a helium headspace with either 0 or 20% oxygen (O2), and analyzed for N2 and N2O emissions. N fertilization increased N2O emissions fourfold (p=0.03). N2O production was positively correlated with field soil moisture (r=0.45, p=0.002), and was higher under 20% than 0% atmospheric O2 (p=0.003). With the exception of a handful of samples, we detected no measureable N2 production from these soils, and fertilization did not influence N2 production. This may have been because our experiment occurred during a drought that reduced soil moisture in the field by ∼20%. We have found that N2 emissions correlate with soil moisture elsewhere in the LEF. While we conclude that N deposition may not influence the N2O:N2 of soil emissions under such conditions, it is still unclear whether this result would hold under higher rainfall.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85094", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85095" } }
{"authors":"Nastaran Saberi::University of Waterloo--Richard Kelly::University of Waterloo--Chris Derksen::Environment Canada Toronto--Peter Toose::Environment Canada Toronto--", "title":"C41D-0763: Coupling DMRT-ML to a Multi-Scale Passive Microwave Data", "abstract":"Dense Media Radiative Transfer Theory (DMRT) for multi layered snowpack (Picard et al., 2012), a physically based numerical model for microwave emission from snow, is coupled to passive microwave brightness temperature (Tb) observations to retrieve snow depth and snow water equivalent. Passive microwave data obtained from space-based and airborne radiometry were coordinated with intense snow-survey campaigns in the sub-Arctic Eureka tundra snow cover region during April 2011. The airborne Tb observations were made across a 50 x 50 km grid using two sampling approaches: high altitude, low spatial resolution observations with footprint dimensions of ~550 x 850 m and low altitude, high spatial resolution observations at ~70 x 110m. The Tb observations from the Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer Earth Observing System (AMSR-E), covering the study area in four pixels of 25 x 25 km, were also used to compare with the airborne observations. A preliminary step in retrieval via physical modeling is parameterizing model inputs in the forward mode to assure an inverse model will result an accurate measure of the unknown variable (snow depth). Measurements of snowpack stratigraphy from snow-pits and interpolated snow depth data from magna probe measurements are used to force the DMRT model. While the optical grain size (D0) is used in DMRT, observed grain diameter (Dmax) was measured in the field. In this study, a method based on a practical approach that classifies SSA for each type of snow layer is used and optical grain size is then calculated using reported field data. Furthermore, we report on simple approaches to parameterize stickiness factor and snowpack physical temperature. Using forward DMRT model simulations of snow from different field observations, the sensitivity of the DMRT model to snowpack properties is evaluated at two scales: airborne and spaceborne. For instance, results indicate that 1 K change in snowpack physical temperature of 265 K results in ~1 K change of Tb at 36GHz, and 100 mm change in grain size from 400 to 500 mm (in a 30 to 50 cm snowpack) causes ~8 K change in simulated Tb. The analysis explains how Tbs from the high resolution airborne measurements scale up to the satellite observation scale. It also provides insight into the appropriate retrieval scheme suitable for satellite-scale estimates.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85095", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85096" } }
{"authors":"Kandaga Pujiana::Oregon State University--", "title":"OS53C-04: Ocean Mixing due to MJO wind bursts", "abstract":"Measurements in the equatorial Indian Ocean, including 2 months from ship at 0, 80E and a year from moorings at 0,80E and 0,90E with chipods to measure mixing, documented the oceanic responses to several MJO events during fall 2011-spring 2012. The MJO attributed westerly wind bursts generated the Yoshida-Wyrtki Jet and intense surface-forced mixing. The jet persisted long after the MJO passage and enhanced subsurface mixing at the Jet’s base. The impact of MJO-initialized mixing on continued sea surface temperature modification is discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85096", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85097" } }
{"authors":"Tung-Shin Hsu::University of California Los Angeles--", "title":"SM41B-2483: A Comparison of the Propagated Solar Wind with Near-Earth Solar Wind Observations", "abstract":"Magneotospheric dynamics are primarily controlled by the solar wind and its interplanetary magnetic field (IMF). Majority of the magnetospheric studies relied on observation of the solar wind frequently taken as far away as the L1 Lagrange point approximately 230 RE upstream. The quality of the empirical or theoretical modeling depends on how accurately the solar wind observation at L1 can be propagated to the magnetosphere and drives the magnetospheric dynamics. It has been more than two decades that researchers seek to determine the structures and evolution of the solar wind observationally in order to characterize the propagated solar wind parcels that interact with the Earth. Russell et al. [1980] used solar wind data at the Earth and L1 without considering the type of solar wind structures and found that the Bz correlations varied from 0.0 to 1.0. Although the most probable correlation was 0.85, half of the time the correlation was less than 0.5. The scale of IMF correlations was reexamined by Collier et al. [1998] using data from Wind and IMP 8. It should be noted that Collier et al. [1998] examined data during solar minimum and Russell et al. [1980] examined data during solar maximum. The scales of solar wind plasma and magnetic field were further examined by Richardson and Paularena [2001]. The found that the transverse scale for a decrease in density correlation by 0.1 is 120 Re and for velocity about 70 Re. In contrast the transverse scales for the components of the IMF are about 50 Re. Using ISEE 2 and IMP8 from 1978 to 1985, Hsu and McPherron [2009] found that a small transvers IMF structure of about 15 Re can occur only about 5%~13% . Most of the recent studies examining Sun-Earth coupling using OMNI solar data which is propagated to the Earth-Sun line by a method based upon minimum variance analysis [Weimer et al., 2003; Bargatze et al., 2005]. The important question of how often a near-earth IMF structure is absent from the propagated solar wind and vice versa is critical for the magnetospheric studies. In this study we use the Themis solar wind observations in the year 2008 to compare with the OMNI solar wind data to examine how often the propagated solar wind is matched with the near-Earth solar wind observations and its implication for magnetospheric studies.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85097", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85098" } }
{"authors":"Yonggang Yan::Institute of Geology and Geophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Baochun Huang::Peking University--Donghai Zhang::Peking University--Jie Zhao::Institute of Geology and Geophysics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences--", "title":"GP31A-1372: New paleomagnetic results from the Permian and Mesozoic rocks in central and northeast Thailand: their implications for the construction of the Indochina block in Pangea", "abstract":"Paleomagnetic studies of the Indochina block, aiming to reconstruct the paleogeography, have been undertaken for several decades. Since the Indochina block is lack of reliable paleomagnetic data to constraint its paleo-positions during the Middle Permian to Upper Triassic, the paleogeography reconstruction is still in debate between different models reported. Here we present new paleomagnetic data of Middle Permian to Upper Triassic sediment rocks from the Indochina block in Thailand, and recalculate paleomagnetic data reported by different authors. We collected the Permian samples in 20 sites distributed in the central Thailand, and Triassic samples from the Huai Hin Lat and Nam Phong formations in 13 sites in the northern Thailand.The magnetic directions of the 11 sites of Permian limestones are not significantly clustered after tilt correction which implying a remagnetized result. Remarkably, in geographic coordinate, the 11 sites were distributed along a circle showing a similar inclination，which is 22.9° implying the paleolatitude to be about 12°. Totally, 13 sites from the Huai Hin Lat formation are included in the calculation of the formation mean direction Dg/Ig = 21.4°/38.1°, kg = 19.5, α95 = 9.6° before and Ds/Is = 43.0°/48.0°, ks = 47.4, α95 = 6.1°, N = 13 after bedding correction. A pre-folding characteristic magnetization is suggested by the positive fold test result derived from the Huai Hin Lat formation, and thus implies a primary remanence of the Norian Stage Upper Triassic rocks. A new Nam Phong formation mean direction derived from 11 sites is Dg/Ig = 36.5°/31.3°, kg = 14.7, α95 = 12.3°before and Ds/Is = 36.4°/37.8°, ks = 68.5, α95 = 5.6°, N = 11 after bedding correction. The two formation mean directions correspond to the magnetic pole positions , Plat./Plon=48.7°N/165.9°E, A95=7.2° and Plat./Plon=55.2°N/178.0°E, A95=5.9°, respectively. A remarkable tectonic movement (~8° southward) of the Indochina block from the age of the Huai Hin Lat formation to the Nam Phong formation is suggested in this study, indicating the Indochina block locates in the west of the South China block at the Norian Age Late Triassic and moved to a new position which is quite near the present at the Rhaetian Age of Late Triassic to Early Jurassic.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85098", "section":"Geomagnetism and Paleomagnetism"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85099" } }
{"authors":"Matthew Alongi::University of Colorado at Boulder--Claire Howard::Northwestern University--Joseph Kasprzyk::University of Colorado at Boulder--Joseph Ryan::University of Colorado at Boulder--", "title":"H31E-1466: Toward a multi-objective decision support framework to support regulations of unconventional oil and gas development", "abstract":"Unconventional oil and gas development (UOGD) using hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling has recently fostered an unprecedented acceleration in energy development. Regulations seek to protect environmental quality of areas surrounding UOGD, while maintaining economic benefits. One such regulation is a setback distance, which dictates the minimum proximity between an oil and gas well and an object such as a residential or commercial building, property line, or water source. In general, most setback regulations have been strongly politically motivated without a clear scientific basis for understanding the relationship between the setback distance and various performance outcomes. This presentation discusses a new decision support framework for setback regulations, as part of a large NSF-funded sustainability research network (SRN) on UOGD. The goal of the decision support framework is to integrate a wide array of scientific information from the SRN into a coherent framework that can help inform policy regarding UOGD. The decision support framework employs multiobjective evolutionary algorithm (MOEA) optimization coupled with simulation models of air quality and other performance-based outcomes on UOGD. The result of the MOEA optimization runs are quantitative tradeoff curves among different objectives. For example, one such curve could demonstrate air pollution concentrations versus estimates of energy development profits, for different levels of setback distance. Our results will also inform policy-relevant discussions surrounding UOGD such as comparing single- and multi-well pads, as well as regulations on the density of well development over a spatial area.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85099", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85100" } }
{"authors":"Wilson Salls::University of California Davis--Toby O'Geen::University of California Davis--", "title":"H13C-1559: Mapping Erosion Risk in California’s Rangelands Using the Universal Soil Loss Equation (USLE)", "abstract":"Soil loss constitutes a multi-faceted problem for agriculture: in addition to reducing soil fertility and crop yield, it compromises downstream water quality. Sediment itself is a major issue for aquatic ecosystems, but also serves as a vector for transporting nutrients, pesticides, and pathogens. Rangelands are thought to be a contributor to water quality degradation in California, particularly in the northern Coast Range. Though total maximum daily loads (TMDLs) have been imposed in some watersheds, and countless rangeland water quality outreach activities have been conducted, the connection between grazing intensity recommendations and changes in water quality is poorly understood at the state level. This disconnect gives rise to poorly informed regulations and discourages adoption of best management practices by ranchers. By applying the Universal Soil Loss Equation (USLE) at a statewide scale, we highlighted areas most prone to erosion. We also investigated how two different grazing intensity scenarios affect modeled soil loss. Geospatial data layers representing the USLE parameters—rainfall erosivity, soil erodibility, slope length and steepness, and cover—were overlaid to model annual soil loss. Monitored suspended sediment data from a small North Coast watershed with grazing as the predominant land use was used to validate the model. Modeled soil loss values were nearly one order of magnitude higher than monitored values; average soil loss feeding the downstream-most site was modeled at 0.329 t ha-1 yr-1, whereas storm-derived sediment passing the site over two years was calculated to be 0.037 t ha-1 yr-1. This discrepancy may stem from the fact that the USLE models detached sediment, whereas stream monitoring reflects sediment detached and subsequently transported to the waterway. Preliminary findings from the statewide map support the concern that the North Coast is particularly at risk given its combination of intense rain, erodible soils, and relatively steep terrain, though there is a fair degree of variability statewide.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85100", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85101" } }
{"authors":"Patricia DeRepentigny::McGill University--Bruno Tremblay::McGill University--Robert Newton::Columbia University of New York--Stephanie Pfirman::Barnard College--", "title":"C51A-0685: Geographical Patterns of Sea-Ice Retreat in the Transition to a Seasonally Ice-Free Arctic", "abstract":"The September sea-ice extent minimum is influenced by summertime processes, primarily thermodynamic, as well as dynamic processes during the previous winter. In this paper, we focus on the effect of the large-scale winter mean sea-ice circulation on the following September minimum sea-ice extent and, in particular, how coastal divergence in the western and eastern Arctic dictates the geographical pattern of retreat. We compare the Community Climate System Model 4 (CCSM4) and the Community Earth System Model 1 Large Ensemble (CESM-LE) with sea-ice motion vectors from NOAA/NSIDC for the past three decades. We find that the large-scale mean winter atmospheric circulation in CCSM4 is characterized by a positive Arctic Oscillation (AO) index with a broad Transpolar Drift Stream, sea-ice divergence in the western Arctic and a large negative bias in its Arctic mean sea-level pressure (around -7 mb). On the other hand, CESM-LE has a mean winter sea-ice circulation more similar to observations in its late 20th century climate and no bias in its mean sea-level pressure, although there are some spatial differences. We use a Lagrangian ice trajectory model to quantify the amount of ice divergence along the Alaskan and Eurasian coastlines by backtracking the September sea-ice extent minimum ice edge to its position throughout the previous year. We find that the sea-ice retreat in CCSM4 occurs mostly on the Pacific side of the Arctic Ocean with more coastal divergence in the Chukchi and Beaufort seas – in line with the more positive AO. On the other hand, the sea-ice retreat is found to be more symmetric around the North Pole in CESM-LE. Given that a positive trend in the AO index is a robust feature of Global Climate Models participating in CMIP5, our results suggest that sea ice will continue to retreat preferentially from the Pacific sector, as has been observed in the last decade.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85101", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85102" } }
{"authors":"Jonathan Goodall::University of Virginia Main Campus--Mohamed Morsy::University of Virginia Main Campus--Anthony Castronova::Utah State University--Brian Miles::University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill--Venkatesh Merwade::Purdue University--David Tarboton::Utah State University--", "title":"H43A-1474: Model Sharing and Collaboration using HydroShare", "abstract":"HydroShare is a web-based system funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF) for sharing hydrologic data and models as resources. Resources in HydroShare can either be assigned a generic type, meaning the resource only has Dublin Core metadata properties, or one of a growing number of specific resource types with enhanced metadata profiles defined by the HydroShare development team. Examples of specific resource types in the current release of HydroShare ( http://www.hydroshare.org ) include time series, geographic raster, Multidimensional (NetCDF), model program, and model instance. Here we describe research and development efforts in HydroShare project for model-related resources types. This work has included efforts to define metadata profiles for common modeling resources, execute models directly through the HydroShare user interface using Docker containers, and interoperate with the 3rd party application SWATShare for model execution and visualization. These examples demonstrate the benefit of HydroShare to support model sharing and address collaborative problems involving modeling. The presentation will conclude with plans for future modeling-related development in HydroShare including supporting the publication of workflow resources, enhanced metadata for additional hydrologic models, and linking model resources with other resources in HydroShare to capture model provenance.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85102", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85103" } }
{"authors":"Nalbeat Kwon::University of Texas at Austin--John Gentle::Texas Advanced Computing Center--Suzanne Pierce::University of Texas at Austin--", "title":"IN53B-1837: Resurrecting Legacy Code Using Ontosoft Knowledge-Sharing and Digital Object Management to Revitalize and Reproduce Software for Groundwater Management Research", "abstract":"Software code developed for research is often used for a relatively short period of time before it is abandoned, lost, or becomes outdated. This unintentional abandonment of code is a valid problem in the 21st century scientific process, hindering widespread reusability and increasing the effort needed to develop research software. Potentially important assets, these legacy codes may be resurrected and documented digitally for long-term reuse, often with modest effort. Furthermore, the revived code may be openly accessible in a public repository for researchers to reuse or improve. For this study, the research team has begun to revive the codebase for Groundwater Decision Support System (GWDSS), originally developed for participatory decision making to aid urban planning and groundwater management, though it may serve multiple use cases beyond those originally envisioned. GWDSS was designed as a java-based wrapper with loosely federated commercial and open source components. If successfully revitalized, GWDSS will be useful for both practical applications as a teaching tool and case study for groundwater management, as well as informing theoretical research. Using the knowledge-sharing approaches documented by the NSF-funded Ontosoft project, digital documentation of GWDSS is underway, from conception to development, deployment, characterization, integration, composition, and dissemination through open source communities and geosciences modeling frameworks. Information assets, documentation, and examples are shared using open platforms for data sharing and assigned digital object identifiers. Two instances of GWDSS version 3.0 are being created: 1) a virtual machine instance for the original case study to serve as a live demonstration of the decision support tool, assuring the original version is usable, and 2) an open version of the codebase, executable installation files, and developer guide available via an open repository, assuring the source for the application is accessible with version control and potential for new branch developments. Finally, metadata about the software has been completed within the OntoSoft portal to provide descriptive curation, make GWDSS searchable, and complete documentation of the scientific software lifecycle.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85103", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85104" } }
{"authors":"Patricia Yager::University of Georgia--Hilde Oliver::University of Georgia--Robert Sherrell::Rutgers Univ--Sharon Stammerjohn::University of Colorado Boulder--Pierre St-Laurent::Old Dominion University--Eileen Hofmann::Old Dominion University--Thomas Mote::University of Georgia--Renato Castelao::University of Georgia--Asa Rennermalm::Rutgers University New Brunswick--Marco Tedesco::CUNY City College of New York--Kevin Arrigo::Stanford University--", "title":"C21A-0726: Ice Sheet Meltwater Impacts on Biological Productivity in High-Latitude Coastal Zones - Observations and Model Results for West Antarctica and Southwest Greenland", "abstract":"Surface mass balance observations and models confirm that both the west Antarctic and Greenland Ice Sheets have undergone accelerating ice mass losses during the past decade. These losses enhance freshwater discharge to the ocean and have important implications for ocean circulation and sea level, but they can also impact marine ecosystems and carbon cycling. High-latitude primary productivity is limited by light or nutrients (or both), and phytoplankton access to these limiting factors can be altered by freshwater additions. Mechanisms for delivering meltwater to the ocean are complex and depend in part on whether the melt occurs at the ice-atmosphere or ice-ocean interface. Marine-terminus glaciers may generate buoyant plumes at depth, similar to upwelling whereas runoff from glacial termini on land will behave more like a riverine point source at the ocean surface. Here, we present preliminary results from two ongoing efforts to understand these impacts: one from the Amundsen Sea Polynya (ASP) in west Antarctica (NSF-funded INSPIRE), and another from NASA-IDS Ice Sheet Impact Study in coastal Greenland. Field observations from the Amundsen Sea Polynya International Research Expedition (ASPIRE) showed how the enormous phytoplankton bloom in the central ASP depends on an iron supply from the Dotson Ice Shelf (DIS). This outcome implied a three-dimensional pathway for iron, from the DIS cavity to the euphotic zone of the ASP bloom region located 20–100 km offshore. Such a pathway differs from the traditional one-dimensional view, where nutrients are injected into the euphotic zone by vertical mixing. Mesoscale structures and eddies may play a central role. A ROMS model is used to investigate key physical and biogeochemical processes in the ASP region. A similar effort is underway to investigate the fate of extreme melt from Greenland and its impact on primary productivity. In coastal Greenland, meltwater is modeled as surface runoff and the resulting shallower mixed layers can enhance light availability to coastal phytoplankton by 5-20 W m-2. Predictions from both models are tested against observations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85104", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85105" } }
{"authors":"Ryan Murphy::Western Washington University--Robert Mitchell::Western Washington University--Christina Bandaragoda::University of Washington Seattle Campus--Oliver Grah::Nooksack Indian Tribe--", "title":"C33E-0871: Impacts of Forecasted Climate Change on Snowpack, Glacier Recession, and Streamflow in the Nooksack River Basin", "abstract":"Like many watersheds in the North Cascades Mountain range, streamflow in the Nooksack River is strongly influenced by precipitation and snowmelt in the spring and glacial melt in the warmer summer months. With a maritime climate and a high relief basin with glacial ice (3400 hectares), the streamflow response in the Nooksack is sensitive to increases in temperature, thus forecasting the basins response to future climate is of vital importance for water resources planning purposes. The watershed (2000 km2) in the northwest of Washington, USA, is a valuable freshwater resource for regional municipalities, industry, and agriculture, and provides critical habitat for endangered salmon species. Due to a lack of spatially distributed long-term historical weather observations in the basin for downscaling purposes, we apply publically available statistically derived 1/16 degree gridded surface data along with the Distributed Hydrology Soil Vegetation Model (DHSVM; Wigmosta et al., 1992) with newly developed coupled dynamic glacier model (Clarke et al., 2015) to simulate hydrologic processes in the Nooksack River basin. We calibrate and validate the DHSVM to observed glacial mass balance and glacial ice extent as well as to observed daily streamflow and SNOTEL data in the Nooksack basin. For the historical period, we model using a gridded meteorological forcing data set (1950-2010; Livneh et al., 2013). We simulate forecasted climate change impacts, including glacial recession on streamflow, using gridded daily statically downscaled data from global climate models of the CMIP5 with RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 forcing scenarios developed using the multivariate adaptive constructed analogs method (Abatzoglou and Brown, 2011). Simulation results project an increase in winter streamflows due to more rainfall rather than snow, and a decrease in summer flows with a general shift in peak spring flows toward earlier in the spring. Glacier melt contribution to streamflow initially increases throughout the first half of the 21st century and decreases in the latter half after glacier ice volume decreases substantially.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85105", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85106" } }
{"authors":"DeBonne Wishart::Central State University--", "title":"ED13A-0885: Technology-Driven and Innovative Training for Sustainable Agriculture in The Face of Climate Change", "abstract":"Innovative training in ‘Sustainable Agriculture’ for an increasingly STEM-dependent agricultural sector will require a combination of approaches and technologies for global agricultural production to increase while offsetting climate change. Climate change impacts the water resources of nations as normal global weather patterns are altered during El Nino events. Agricultural curricula must incorporate awareness of ‘climate change’ in order to find novel ways to (1) assure global food security; (2) improve soil productivity and conservation; (3) improve crop yields and irrigation; (4) inexpensively develop site specific principles of crop management based on variable soil and associated hydrological properties; and (5) improve precision farming. In February 2015, Central State University (CSU), Ohio became an 1890 Land-Grant institution vital to the sustainability of Ohio’s agricultural sector. Besides agricultural extension, the agriculture curriculum at CSU integrates multidisciplinary courses in science, technology engineering, agriculture, and mathematics (STEAM). The agriculture program could benefit from a technology-driven, interdisciplinary soil science course that promotes climate change education and climate literacy while being offered in both a blended and collaborative learning environment. The course will focus on the dynamics of microscale to mesoscale processes occurring in farming systems, those of which impact climate change or could be impacted by climate change. Elements of this course will include: climate change webinars; soil-climate interactions; carbon cycling; the balance of carbon fluxes between soil storage and atmosphere; microorganisms and soil carbon storage; paleoclimate and soil forming processes; geophysical techniques used in the characterization of soil horizons; impact of climate change on soil fertility; experiments; and demonstrations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85106", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85107" } }
{"authors":"Craig Ulrich::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Baptiste Dafflon::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Yuxin Wu::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Timothy Kneafsey::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Robin López::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--John Peterson::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Susan Hubbard::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--", "title":"C11C-0788: Lab-Scale Investigation of Multi-dimensional Relationships between Soil Intrinsic Properties to Improve Estimation of Soil Organic and Ice Content using Novel Core Imaging and Geophysical Techniques in Arctic Tundra", "abstract":"Shallow permafrost distribution and characteristics are important for predicting ecosystem feedbacks to a changing climate over decadal to century timescales. These can drive active layer deepening and land surface deformation, which in turn can significantly affect hydrological and biogeochemical responses, including greenhouse gas dynamics. Investigating permafrost soil intrinsic properties generally involves time-consuming and expensive lab-based analysis of few soil cores over a large area and extrapolating between points to characterize spatial variations in soil properties. Geophysical techniques provide lower resolution data over a spatially large area and when coupled with high-resolution point data can potentially estimate with greater accuracy the spatial variation of investigated properties, thus limiting the difficulty of collecting many soil cores in remote areas. As part of the Next-Generation Ecosystem Experiment (NGEE-Arctic), we investigate multi-dimensional relationships between various permafrost intrinsic soil properties, and further linkages with geophysical parameters such as density from X-ray computed tomography (CT) and electrical conductivity from electrical resistance tomography (ERT) to evaluate how best to constrain estimation of properties as soil organic carbon content, ice content and saturation across low- to high-centered polygon features in the arctic tundra. Results of this study enable the quantification of the multi-dimensional relationships between intrinsic properties, which can be further used to constrain estimation of such properties from geophysical data and/or where limited core-based information is available. This study also enables the identification of the key controls on soil electrical resistivity and density at the investigated permafrost site, including salinity, porosity, water content, ice content, soil organic matter, and lithological properties. Overall, inferred multi-dimensional relationships and related uncertainty enable probabilistic mapping of key parameters (organic content, ice content, etc.) using density and soil structural information from CT and bulk electrical resistivity.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85107", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85108" } }
{"authors":"Amitabh Nag::Vaisala Inc.--Kenneth Cummins::University of Arizona--", "title":"AE14A-08: Characteristics of Cloud-to-Ground Lightning Return Strokes Occurring over Land and Ocean", "abstract":"Various studies have reported differences between the characteristics of cloud-to-ground lightning return strokes occurring over land and ocean. Orville et al. [2011] used peak currents estimated by the NALDN for negative cloud-to-ground return strokes to report that their magnitudes are, on average, larger over the ocean than over land. This observation was confirmed by Hutchins et al. [2013] and Said et al. [2013]. However, this discrepancy in peak current magnitudes has not been found for positive return strokes over land and ocean [Cummins et al., 2005; Orville et al., 2011]. Nag and Rakov [2014] reported that, for positive return strokes and propagation over relatively long distances (ranging from about 10 to 160 km) over land, the peak electric field derivative (dE/dt) is considerably smaller and the dE/dt half-peak width is much longer than the values reported in the literature [Cooray et al., 2004] for the case of propagation over salt water. Interestingly, Nag and Rakov’s values are comparable to those reported by Heidler and Hopf [1998] for propagation over a few kilometers over land, for which propagation effects due to finitely conducting soil were expected to be relatively small. This implies that there may be a discrepancy between the values of peak electric field derivative and dE/dt half-peak width for positive return strokes occurring over land versus salt water related to the source, as opposed to propagation effects. On the other hand, Cummins et al. [2005] examined U.S. NLDN reported risetimes of both positive and negative first strokes and found them to be similar for lightning over land and ocean. In this study, we examine magnetic field risetimes and estimated peak currents of return strokes measured by NLDN sensors located close to the coastline for lightning occurring over land and ocean. For “oceanic” return stroke magnetic fields propagating over ocean and several tens of kilometers over relatively high conductivity (>10 mS/m) soil, risetimes were found to be similar to those for land-based return stroke magnetic fields propagating several tens of kilometers over relatively high conductivity soil. We will discuss the significance of these results and examine (via modeling) possible reasons for apparent differences between the characteristics of cloud-to-ground lightning over land and ocean.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85108", "section":"Atmospheric and Space Electricity"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85109" } }
{"authors":"Claire Raftery::Space Sciences Laboratory--Thomas Immel::University of California Berkeley--Karin Hauck::Space Sciences Laboratory--Igor Ruderman::Space Sciences Laboratory--Karen Fox::NASA-Goddard--", "title":"PA33B-2185: NASA ICON mission communications - breaking ground in a new era for NASA", "abstract":"The Ionospheric Connection Explorer (ICON) mission is the first NASA explorer to develop an exclusive communications plan in lieu of the traditional Education and Public Outreach (E/PO) programs. The ICON mission team will describe the plans for its communication efforts, how they will align with the new NASA objectives, and how partnerships with NASA public relations and communications divisions will evolve as the mission approaches launch.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85109", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85110" } }
{"authors":"Ryan Ferrell::University of California Davis--Dylan Ferrell::University of California Davis--Peter Hartsough::University of California Davis--Toby O'Geen::University of California Davis--", "title":"EP31B-0995: Spatial Patterns between Regolith Thickness and Forest Productivity in the Southern Sierra CZO", "abstract":"Soil in conjunction with underlying weathered bedrock make up what is referred to as regolith, which can be thought of as the substrate that actively contributes water and nutrients to above ground biomass. As a result, regolith thickness is an important regulating factor of forest health and drought tolerance in the Sierra Nevada. Our project examined the relationships between landscape position, regolith thickness, and tree productivity within a sub watershed of the Southern Sierra Critical Zone Observatory. We hypothesized that tree productivity will increase with increasing regolith thickness. Data was collected in the summer of 2015 at sixty-five sites within a 522-ha watershed averaging 1180m in elevation with a MAP of 80cm and a MAT of 11C. Sites were randomly selected from a grid and then stratified in the field to capture representative samples from different landscape positions. Regolith was sampled using a hand auger with attachable extensions. At each site we augered to hard bedrock or a maximum depth of 7.56 m, which ever was shallower. Biomass measurements were made for all conifer species (DBH>20cm) within a 10m radius of the primary auger hole. Tree age was measured from a representative tree for all species in the plots. Preliminary findings suggest that there is a weak correlation between landscape position/slope and regolith thickness, likely due to differences in lithology. It also appears that terrain shape can result in conflicting outcomes: 1. It can focus water to promote physical and chemical weathering and thick regolith; or, 2. water focusing can result in landscape scouring, removing soil and weathered bedrock to create shallow regolith. Productivity appears to be a function of regolith thickness, effective precipitation and landscape position. Water collecting areas in the lower watershed are shallow to bedrock, but typically receive high amounts of effective precipitation resulting in greater tree productivity. Moreover, thick regolith in uplands also supports high productivity.  Future work will explore the application of terrain attributes computed from DEMs to characterize the contributions of terrain and effective precipitation. As climate change continues it will become increasingly important for land managers to evaluate forest health, productivity and drought tolerance.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85110", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85111" } }
{"authors":"John Williams::University of Bonn--", "title":"A11E-0097: Ensemble Kalman Filter Data Assimilation with the ParFlow Hydrologic Model", "abstract":"Hydrometeorological research has shown that simulations of atmospheric processes benefit from sophisticated land surface formulations. Moisture and energy fluxes between the land surface and lower atmosphere are influenced strongly not only by atmospheric conditions, but by terrestrial hydrologic processes, soil moisture distribution in particular. By improving the representation of hydrologic processes, better predictive skill can be achieved in a fully-coupled weather forcasting model. Further improvements in the model can be realized by incorporating observed data values into the hydrologic model. This work applies the Ensemble Kalman Filter functionality included in the Data Assimilation Assimilation Research Testbed (DART), a collection of data assimilation tools maintained at the National Center for Atmospheric Research, to the ParFlow hydrologic model—the hydrologic component of the TerrSysMP fully coupled hydrologic – land surface – atmospheric model system. This generalized data assimilation tool allows observations of variables in the hydrologic component of the system to be incorporated into the overall error covariance matrix thus guiding the development of quantities that define the model state. Single dimension column tests, and a three-dimensional idealized catchment drainage and dry-out test were performed with the ParFlow-DART system to evaluate the effects of assimilating pressure head, soil moisture, and outflow observations on the development of the model through time. The data assimilation system was then applied to the hydrologic portion a fully-coupled (subsurface, land surface, and atmosphere) simulation over the North Rhine-Westphalia region in western Germany to demonstrate the utility of this system in a non-idealized and realistic forecasting situation. The success of these tests will allow the ParFlow-DART system to be developed into a complete data assimilation package for the TerrSysMP fully-coupled modeling system.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85111", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85112" } }
{"authors":"Alexandra Urza::University of Nevada Reno--Peter Weisberg::University of Nevada Reno--", "title":"B23B-0610: Spatial Correlates of Lower Treeline Position in the Western US", "abstract":"Lower and upper treelines jointly determine the distribution of forests in many mountainous regions. Although upper treelines across the world have received extensive scientific attention, generalizable studies of the climate controls of lower treelines are largely absent from ecological literature. Lower treelines are thought to be ultimately limited by plant water balance, and are expected to contract with predicted increases in water deficits. However, where the position of lower treeline is constrained by land use and disturbance rather than by water balance, the distribution of forests will likely be less sensitive to climate changes. In this study, we investigated the relative importance of climate, land use, and disturbance for determining the position of lower treeline in the western US. We developed a moving window method to automate the mapping of lower treelines in the Intermountain West, an arid region encompassing gradients of precipitation (both magnitude and seasonality), growing season length, geology, disturbance history, and land use. We used classification and regression trees to identify climatic thresholds most related to lower treeline position and important effects of land use and disturbance. Preliminary results show that lower treeline is associated with the interaction of soils and seasonal water balance, although the strength of the relationship varies by forest type and region. Furthermore, land use (wood harvest, grazing, and infrastructure development) and disturbance (fire) often coincide with the lower treeline boundary, suggesting that the actual position of lower treeline is partially controlled by secondary constraints. Future work will compare the modeled climate potential of lower treeline to the actual distribution, distinguishing between treelines that are likely at their ecophysiological limit (and thus susceptible to contraction in a warming or drying climate) from those contrained above their climate potential (areas of potential down-slope expansion).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85112", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85113" } }
{"authors":"Cassidy Jay::Purdue University--Lucy Flesch::Purdue University--Rebecca Bendick::University of Montana--", "title":"T44C-07: Kinematics and Dynamics of the Main Ethiopian Rift", "abstract":"Although the East African Rift System (EARS) is often cited as a type example for “narrow” rifting (where strain is localized along the rift axis), the true extent of rift-related deformation remains largely unknown due to sparse geophysical observations outside of the main rift valley. Our study, which takes this large scale approach, investigates the distribution of deformation in the Main Ethiopian Rift (MER) and surrounding regions, including the Ethiopian Highlands to the west of the rift valley, Somali Platform to the east, and Afar Triple Junction. We first construct kinematic, self-consistent strain rate and velocity fields on a 1° by 1° grid using continuous spline interpolations of strain rate observations (earthquake and fault data, plate rotations, and GPS velocities). Next, we calculate the deviatoric stress field associated with gravitational potential energy (GPE) by integrating density as a function of depth using published crustal density structures (CRUST1.0) and newly obtained receiver functions. We then directly solve for the deviatoric stress field associated with the lateral density variations by assuming a minimum energy stress field (e.g. Flesch et al. [2001]). Finally, we look for symmetries and asymmetries in both the strain rate and GPE deviatoric stress fields to assess the source of observed, off-rift deformation. We compare our results to published global and regional models that include the East African Rift and Iceland. Results suggest that the MER is not an end-member, “narrow” type rift, and that heterogeneities in lithospheric strength likely play an important role in governing the kinematics of rifting in Ethiopia.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85113", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85114" } }
{"authors":"Jennifer Blank::NASA Ames Research Center--", "title":"ED54B-02: Studies of Places on Our Home Ground Where We Find Life That Might Be Like Places Life Could Be On Other Worlds", "abstract":"I am interested in looking for strange places where we might find life. Not life like you and me, but tiny life, smaller than our eyes can see. Sometimes, this tiny life leaves marks on rocks or in water that is living there now or that it once lived there long ago. This can be very interesting – it means that we might be able to know that some kind of life lived long ago even if it’s not living now. It might also mean that we can find marks of life far far away from our home, on other worlds. One day people will go to other worlds to look for life. We hope to find it or marks that it was once there. I am going to talk about two places I study. In one, rocks are forming in plain daylight, in water that is only as deep as your knee (or maybe less). They should not be there. It seems very possible that the tiny life helps them form there. I study these rocks and ways that tiny life might help the rocks form. Rocks usually last a lot longer than tiny life, so they are an example of a mark that could last for a long long time and be a sign that life was once around there, long after the tiny life died. I will also talk about tiny life that lives under ground in the dark in places big enough that you and I can walk to. By this I mean that there is a trail that leads under ground with enough space for people to enter and study. Of course, we need light to see there, so we bring man made light with us. This tiny life gets food to live from water and rock, not from the sun. The tiny life also makes new rocks, usually easy to see because they are different colors from the other rocks. Again, this is a mark of life, and I am interested in how the marks from tiny life are made, how long they might last, and how many different kinds of marks I can find.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85114", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85115" } }
{"authors":"Joseph Housam::University of Toronto--Russell Pysklywec::University of Toronto--Philip Heron::University of Toronto--Randell Stephenson::University of Aberdeen--", "title":"T33A-2921: Glacial erosion during orogenesis: A study of the intraplate Eurekan Orogeny of Ellesmere Island.", "abstract":"The Eurekan Orogeny of northeastern Ellesmere Island in the Canadian arctic was formed as a result of mountain-building processes in the Paleogene. The orogen developed relatively distant from any active convergent plate boundaries making it a representation of a class of intraplate mountain-building. In this work we investigate the geodynamics of the Eurekan and in particular focus on the potential role of glacial erosion in modifying the orogenesis. The study is motivated by important recent research that has demonstrated a significant interaction between (climate-controlled) surface processes and solid Earth tectonics at collision. Glacial erosion is thought to have the capability of eroding at a rate which matches with that of rock uplift in active orogens, referred to as the “buzz saw” effect of glaciers. Using the geodynamic modelling code of SOPALE we developed forward 2D models of the idealized Ellesmerian lithospheric structure and imposed shortening to explore Eurekan-style orogenic deformation. In the numerical experiments, we modified the erosional algorithm in the model such to investigate various implementations of the glacial buzz saw. The model results show how the surface topography and internal lithospheric structure of the orogeny are modified by variable glacial erosion. In addition to illustrating how the Eurekan orogeny may have evolved, the results provide insight into how the generic orogenic zones may develop in a glacial environment.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85115", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85116" } }
{"authors":"Donovan Mathias::NASA Ames Research Center--Lorien Wheeler::NASA Ames Research Center--Dinesh Prabhu::NASA Ames Research Center--Michael Aftosmis::NASA Ames Research Center--Jessie Dotson::NASA Ames Research Center--Darrel Robertson::NASA Ames Research Center--", "title":"NH14B-06: Sensitivity to Uncertainty in Asteroid Impact Risk Assessment", "abstract":"The Engineering Risk Assessment (ERA) team at NASA Ames Research Center is developing a physics-based impact risk model for probabilistically assessing threats from potential asteroid impacts on Earth. The model integrates probabilistic sampling of asteroid parameter ranges with physics-based analyses of entry, breakup, and impact to estimate damage areas and casualties from various impact scenarios. Assessing these threats is a highly coupled, dynamic problem involving significant uncertainties in the range of expected asteroid characteristics, how those characteristics may affect the level of damage, and the fidelity of various modeling approaches and assumptions. The presented model is used to explore the sensitivity of impact risk estimates to these uncertainties in order to gain insight into what additional data or modeling refinements are most important for producing effective, meaningful risk assessments. In the extreme cases of very small or very large impacts, the results are generally insensitive to many of the characterization and modeling assumptions. However, the nature of the sensitivity can change across moderate-sized impacts. Results will focus on the value of additional information in this critical, mid-size range, and how this additional data can support more robust mitigation decisions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85116", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85117" } }
{"authors":"Rosalba Bonaccorsi::SETI Institute Mountain View NASA Ames Research Center--David Willson::KISS Institute/NASA Ames Research Center--Alberto Fairen::Cornell University Centro de Astrobiología--Leslie Baker::University of Idaho--Christopher McKay::NASA Ames Research Center--Aaron Zent::NASA Ames Research Center--Paul Mahaffy::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--", "title":"P43B-2118: Hollow Nodules Gas Escape Sedimentary Structures in Lacustrine Deposits on Earth and Gale Crater", "abstract":"Curiosity’s Mastcam and MAHLI instruments in Gale Crater (GC) imaged mm-sized circular rimmed hollow nodules (HNs) (Figure 1A), pitting the Sheepbed mudstone of Yellowknife Bay Formation [1,2]. HNs are significantly smaller than the solid nodules within the outcrop, with an external mean diameter of 1.2 mm and an interior one of 0.7 mm [2] Several formation mechanisms of HNs have been discussed, such as: (1) Diagenetic dissolution of soluble mineral phases; or, (2) Gas bubbles released shortly after sediment deposition [1-3]. In an ephemeral pond in Ubehebe Crater (Death Valley, CA) we observed the formation of hollow nodule sedimentary structures produced by gas bubbles (Figure 1C) preserved in smectite-rich mud that are strikingly similar to those imaged in GC (Figure 1A). This finding supports the gas bubble hypothesis [2].  Ubehebe Crater (UC) surface sediment hollow nodules were sampled, imaged, and their internal diameter measured (200 hollow structures) showing similar shape, distribution, and composition to those imaged by Curiosity in GC. UC in-situ observations suggest the gas bubbles were generated within the slightly reducing ephemerally submerged mud. These intra-crater deposits remain otherwise extremely dry year round, i.e., Air_rH ~2-5%; ground H2O wt%: 1-2%; Summer air/ground T: 45-48ºC/67-70ºC [4-5].  Data from the Sample Analysis at Mars (SAM), CheMin, and ChemCam instruments onboard the rover revealed that HNs-bearing mudstone are rich in smectite clay e.g., ~18-20% [6,7] deposited in a neutral to mildly alkaline environment, capturing a period when the surface was potentially habitable [1]. The UC HNs-hosting deposits are also rich in smectite clays (~30%) and occur in an ephemeral shallow freshwater setting [4-5]. If present, surface hollow nodules are easy to find in dry clay-rich mud in lacustrine sediments, so they could represent a new indicator of ephemeral but habitable/inhabited environments on both Earth and early Mars. References: [1] Grotzinger J.P. et al. (2014), Science 343, 124277. [2] Stack et al. (2014) JGR,Planets 119343. [4] Bonaccorsi R. et al. (2012) AGU Fall Meeting, Abstract #P11B-1839. [5] Bonaccorsi, R. et al. (2014) AGU Fall Meeting, Paper #EP53A-3632. [6] McLennan, S.M. et al. (2014) Science 343, 1244734. [7] Ming D.W. et al. (2014) Science, 343, 1245267.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85117", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85118" } }
{"authors":"Eric Donovan::University of Calgary--", "title":"SA43C-01: The Transition Region Explorer: Observing the Multi-Scale Dynamics of Geospace", "abstract":"Meso- and global-scale IT remote sensing is accomplished via satellite imagers and ground-based instruments. On the ground, the approach is arrays providing extensive as possible coverage (the ` net` ) and powerful observatories that drill deep to provide detailed information about small-scale processes (the ` drill` ). Always, there is a trade between cost, spatial resolution, coverage (extent), number of parameters, and more, such that in general the larger the network the sparser the coverage. Where are we now? There are important gaps. With THEMIS-ASI, we see processes that quickly evolve beyond the field of view of one observatory, but involve space/time scales not captured by existing meso- and large-scale arrays. Many forefront questions require observations at heretofore unexplored space and time scales, and comprehensive inter-hemispheric conjugate observations than are presently available. To address this, a new ground-based observing initiative is being developed in Canada. Called TREx, for Transition Region Explorer, this new facility will incorporate dedicated blueline, redline, and Near-Infrared All-Sky Imagers, together with an unprecedented network of ten imaging riometers, with a combined field of view spanning more than three hours of magnetic local time and from equatorward to poleward of typical auroral latitudes (spanning the ionospheric footprint of the “nightside transition region” that separates the highly stretched tail and the inner magnetosphere). The TREx field-of-view is covered by HF radars, and contains a dense network of magnetometers and VLF receivers, as well as other geospace and upper atmospheric remote sensors. Taken together, TREx and these co-located instruments represent a quantum leap forward in terms of imaging, in multiple parameters (precipitation, ionization, convection, and currents), ionospheric dynamics in the above-mentioned scale gap. This represents an exciting new opportunity for studying geospace at the system level, especially for using the aurora to remote sense magnetospheric plasma physics and dynamics, and comes with a set of Big Data challenges that are going to be exciting. One such challenge is the development of a fundamentally new type of data product, namely time series of multi-parameter, geospatially referenced ‘data cubes’.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85118", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85120" } }
{"authors":"Montana Etten-Bohm::University of Alabama in Huntsville--", "title":"GC21C-1119: Tornadogensis within Hurricanes Based on the Orientation of the Rainband to the Coast after Landfall", "abstract":"The focus of this study is to investigate the development of tornadoes within the rainband of a hurricane for various orientations of the rainband when a hurricane makes landfall. The rainband of a hurricane is a common area where tornadogenesis is found depending on the size, intensity, and orientation of the rain band when the storm makes landfall. As a hurricane approaches a coast line, land-surface roughness contributes to surface friction, which can contribute in tornadogenesis. The orientation of the rainband may play a part in the type of supercells that are formed in that rainband and the number and intensity of the tornadoes produced. This study will investigate if the orientation of the rainband leads to the direction in which the supercells rotate, whether clockwise or counter-clockwise, and the scale and intensity of the tornadoes produced.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85120", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85122" } }
{"authors":"Robert Humphries::Golder Associates, Inc.--George Annandale::Golder Associates--Amanda Rock::Golder Associates, Inc.--", "title":"EP21A-0881: A Comparison of Thresholds: Shields and Erodibility Index", "abstract":"The threshold between stasis and mobility, and the forms and processes associated with the interfacial instabilities it defines, is a fundamental component of most morphodynamic systems. Scientists and engineers who focus on the interface of the earth’s dynamic surface and the turbulent fluids of the atmosphere and hydrosphere, have approached this interface from a diversity of perspectives. In the field of sediment transport, Shield’s 1936 paper stands as a benchmark for the theoretical understanding of the threshold of incipient motion of non-cohesive granular transport. However, in processes such as the erosion of cohesive material or bedrock erosion, consensus has yet to be reached among researchers, as to which method most aptly encompasses these processes. The lack of consensus is reasonable, considering the diversity of the applications, and implications, of interface dynamics. When thresholds may depend on the sequence of antecedent conditions, as in cohesive sediment entrainment, or the time scale of perception ranges from many Hertz to geologic eras, as in the processes of rock scour, a diversity of conceptual models is to be anticipated. In Scour Technology (Annandale 2006), the Erodibility Index Method (EIM) is presented as a threshold paradigm that spans the breadth of all earth materials that may experiences erosion by fluid forces. The authors present a comparison of the modern expression of the benchmark theoretical understanding of the threshold of incipient motion of non-cohesive granular material with the EIM. Results illustrate that each threshold can provide insight into the other and that the Shields parameter can be expressed within the vocabulary of the EIM.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85122", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85123" } }
{"authors":"Pamela Moyer::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Margaret Boettcher::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Jeffrey McGuire::Woods Hole Oceanographic Ins--John Collins::WHOI--", "title":"S51A-2635: Constraining Earthquake Source Parameters in Rupture Patches and Rupture Barriers on Gofar Transform Fault, East Pacific Rise from Ocean Bottom Seismic Data", "abstract":"On Gofar transform fault on the East Pacific Rise (EPR), Mw ~6.0 earthquakes occur every ~5 years and repeatedly rupture the same asperity (rupture patch), while the intervening fault segments (rupture barriers to the largest events) only produce small earthquakes. In 2008, an ocean bottom seismometer (OBS) deployment successfully captured the end of a seismic cycle, including an extensive foreshock sequence localized within a 10 km rupture barrier, the Mw 6.0 mainshock and its aftershocks that occurred in a ~10 km rupture patch, and an earthquake swarm located in a second rupture barrier. Here we investigate whether the inferred variations in frictional behavior along strike affect the rupture processes of 3.0 < M < 4.5 earthquakes by determining source parameters for 100 earthquakes recorded during the OBS deployment. Using waveforms with a 50 Hz sample rate from OBS accelerometers, we calculate stress drop using an omega-squared source model, where the weighted average corner frequency is derived from an empirical Green’s function (EGF) method. We obtain seismic moment by fitting the omega-squared source model to the low frequency amplitude of individual spectra and account for attenuation using Q obtained from a velocity model through the foreshock zone. To ensure well-constrained corner frequencies, we require that the Brune [1970] model provides a statistically better fit to each spectral ratio than a linear model and that the variance is low between the data and model. To further ensure that the fit to the corner frequency is not influenced by resonance of the OBSs, we require a low variance close to the modeled corner frequency. Error bars on corner frequency were obtained through a grid search method where variance is within 10% of the best-fit value. Without imposing restrictive selection criteria, slight variations in corner frequencies from rupture patches and rupture barriers are not discernable. Using well-constrained source parameters, we find an average stress drop of 5.7 MPa in the aftershock zone compared to values of 2.4 and 2.9 MPa in the foreshock and swarm zones respectively. The higher stress drops in the rupture patch compared to the rupture barriers reflect systematic differences in along strike fault zone properties on Gofar transform fault.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85123", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85124" } }
{"authors":"Yongchun Zheng::Organization Not Listed National Astronomical Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciences--", "title":"P53C-2142: Improved Estimation Model of Lunar Surface Temperature", "abstract":"Lunar surface temperature (LST) is of great scientific interest both uncovering the thermal properties and designing the lunar robotic or manned landing missions. In this paper, we proposed the improved LST estimation model based on the one-dimensional partial differential equation (PDE). The shadow and surface tilts effects were combined into the model. Using the Chang'E (CE-1) DEM data from the Laser Altimeter (LA), the topographic effect can be estimated with an improved effective solar irradiance (ESI) model. In Fig. 1, the highest LST of the global Moon has been estimated with the spatial resolution of 1 degree /pixel, applying the solar albedo data derived from Clementine UV-750nm in solving the PDE function. The topographic effect is significant in the LST map. It can be identified clearly the maria, highland, and craters. The maximum daytime LST presents at the regions with low albedo, i.g. mare Procellarum, mare Serenitatis and mare Imbrium. The results are consistent with the Diviner’s measurements of the LRO mission. Fig. 2 shows the temperature variations at the center of the disk in one year, assuming the Moon to be standard spherical. The seasonal variation of LST at the equator is about 10K. The highest LST occurs in early May. Fig.1. Estimated maximum surface temperatures of the global Moon in spatial resolution of 1 degree /pixel", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85124", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85125" } }
{"authors":"Kevin O'Brien::University of Washington Seattle Campus--Roland Schweitzer::Weathertop Consulting, LLC--Eugene Burger::NOAA Seattle--", "title":"IN13B-1843: A Free and Open Source Web-based Data Catalog Evaluation Tool", "abstract":"For many years, the Unified Access Framework (UAF) project has worked to provide improved access to scientific data by leveraging widely used data standards and conventions. These standards include the Climate and Forecast (CF) metadata conventions, the Data Access Protocol (DAP) and various Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) standards such as WMS and WCS. The UAF has also worked to create a unified access point for scientific data access through THREDDS and ERDDAP catalogs. A significant effort was made by the UAF project to build a catalog-crawling tool that was designed to crawl remote catalogs, analyze their content and then build a clean catalog that 1) represented only CF compliant data; 2) provided a uniform set of access services and 3) where possible, aggregated data in time. That catalog is available at http://ferret.pmel.noaa.gov/geoide/geoIDECleanCatalog.html .  Although this tool has proved immensely valuable in allowing the UAF project to create a high quality data catalog, the need for a catalog evaluation service or tool to operate on a more local level also exists. Many programs that generate data of interest to the public are recognizing the utility and power of using the THREDDS data server (TDS) to serve that data. However, for some groups that lack the resources to maintain dedicated IT personnel, it can be difficult to set up a properly configured TDS.   The TDS catalog evaluating service that is under development and will be discussed in this presentation is an effort, through the UAF project, to bridge that gap. Based upon the power of the original UAF catalog cleaner, the web evaluator will have the ability to scan and crawl a local TDS catalog, evaluate the contents for compliance with CF standards, analyze the services offered, and identify datasets where possible temporal aggregation would benefit data access. The results of the catalog evaluator will guide the configuration of the dataset in TDS to ensure that it meets the standards as promoted by the UAF framework.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85125", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85127" } }
{"authors":"Jiemin Guo::University of Wyoming--Daniel Beverly::University of Wyoming--Craig Cook::University of Wyoming--Brent Ewers::University of Wyoming--David Williams::University of Wyoming--", "title":"B43H-0655: Influence of Drought on Mesophyll Resistance to CO2 Diffusion and its Impact on Water-Use Efficiency in Trees", "abstract":"The resistance to CO2 diffusion inside leaves (mesophyll resistance; rm) during photosynthesis is often comparable in magnitude to stomatal diffusion resistance, and varies among species and across environmental conditions. Consequently, photosynthesis is strongly limited by rm at low internal CO2 partial pressures, such that its variation may determine patterns of leaf water-use efficiency (WUE). Reduction in stomatal conductance with drought typically increases WUE, but also decreases photosynthesis. In theory, the decrease in photosynthesis could be countered by reduction in rm while maintaining high WUE. It is still uncertain how drought-related changes in rm affect short- and long-term WUE strategies of different tree species. We conducted field observations of instantaneous WUE and 13C discrimination in two dominant conifer species (Pinus contorta and Picea engelmannii) in SE Wyoming over the seasonal dry-down period in the summer of 2015. rm was examined by on-line 13C discrimination using isotope laser spectroscopy. Controlled environment studies on three conifer species (P. contorta, P. engelmannii, and Abies lasiocarpa) and one angiosperm (Populus tremuloides) are in progress. We hypothesize that the plasticity of rm in response to drought accounts for significant adjustments in photosynthetic capacity and WUE. Needle leaf conifers are known to have relatively high rm, and we expect them to show greater improvements in photosynthesis and WUE when rm is decreased compared to angiosperm tree species.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85127", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85128" } }
{"authors":"James Whiteway::York University--Jeff Seabrook::York University--", "title":"A11C-0081: Influence of Mountains on Arctic Tropospheric Ozone", "abstract":"Tropospheric ozone was measured above Ellesmere Island in the Canadian Arctic during spring using a differential absorption lidar (DIAL). Analysis of the observations revealed that mountains had a significant effect on the vertical distribution of ozone. Ozone depletion events were observed when air that had spent significant time near to the frozen surface of the Arctic Ocean reached Eureka. This air arrived at Eureka by flowing over the surrounding mountains. Surface level ozone depletion events were not observed during periods when mountains blocked the flow of air from over the sea ice. In the case of blocking there was an enhancement in the amount of ozone near the surface as air from the mid troposphere descended in the lee of the mountains. Three case studies will be presented.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85128", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85129" } }
{"authors":"Anupma Prakash::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Rudiger Gens::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Jordi Cristobal::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Christine Waigl::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Matthew Balazs::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Patrick Graham::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Christine Butcher::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Elena Sparrow::University of Alaska Fairbanks--", "title":"ED22B-07: Using Place-Based Independent Class Projects as a Means to Hone Research Skills and Prepare a Future Geospatial Workforce", "abstract":"It is never too early to bring in your own research into teaching. Considerable efforts have been made globally to introduce STEM research themes in K12 environments. These efforts a laudable as they help to create STEM identity in students and get students excited to pursue higher education. The task of a post-secondary educator is to build on that excitement and ensure that the students who enter higher education come out knowledgeable, skilled, and employable. At the University of Alaska Fairbanks we have structured our geospatial curricula to include place-based, independent research projects in several semester-long classes. These class-projects serve as mini capstone research experiences that take a student through the entire process of research including: identifying a problem or need; building a hypothesis; formulating the science question; searching, acquiring, and processing data; analyzing and interpreting the research results; and presenting the outcomes in written and oral format to a peer group. Over a decade of experience has shown that students tend to engage and perform well when the research addresses an authentic problem they can relate to and take ownership of. Over 150 student-lead class projects using a variety of freely available datasets have contributed not only to preparing the future workforce, but also to enhancing the research profile of UAF. We extended the same model to a summer internship program where graduate students who have gone through the experience of an in-class research project serve as mentors for undergraduate interns. Even the condensed time frame yields positive outcomes including joint publications between faculty, staff, graduate students and undergraduate students in the peer-reviewed literature.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85129", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85130" } }
{"authors":"Erin Pang::Stanford University--Laura Meredith::Stanford University--Paula Welander::Stanford University--", "title":"B23C-0630: Linking Carbonic Anhydrase Abundance and Diversity in Soils to Ecological Function", "abstract":"Carbonic anhydrase (CA) is an ancient enzyme widespread among bacteria, archaea, and eukarya that catalyzes the following reaction: CO2 + H2O ⇌ HCO3- + H+. Its functions are critical for key cellular processes such as concentrating CO2 for autotrophic growth, pH regulation, and pathogen survival in hosts. Currently, there are six known CA classes (α, β, γ, δ, η, ζ) arising from several distinct evolutionary lineages. CA are widespread in sequenced genomes, with many organisms containing multiple classes of CA or multiple CA of the same class. Soils host rich microbial communities with diverse and important ecological functions, but the diversity and abundance of CA in soils has not been explored. CA appears to play an important, but poorly understood, role in some biogeochemical cycles such as those of CO2 and its oxygen isotope composition and also carbonyl sulfide (COS), which are potential tracers in predictive carbon cycle models. Recognizing the prevalence and functional significance of CA in soils, we used a combined bioinformatics and molecular biology approach to address fundamental questions regarding the abundance, diversity, and function of CA in soils. To characterize the abundance and diversity of the different CA classes in soils, we analyzed existing soil metagenomic and metatranscriptomic data from the DOE Joint Genome Institute databases. Out of the six classes of CA, we only found the α, β, and γ classes to be present in soils, with the β class being the most abundant. We also looked at genomes of sequenced soil microorganisms to learn what combination of CA classes they contain, from which we can begin to predict the physiological role of CA. To characterize the functional roles of the different CA classes in soils, we collected soil samples from a variety of biomes with diverse chemical and physical properties and quantified the rate of two CA-mediated processes: soil uptake of COS and acceleration of the oxygen isotope exchange between CO2 and H2O. We employed PCR-based methods to quantify the abundance and diversity of CA encoding genes and their expression in our samples to link CA classes to the gas flux data. These studies provide the first survey of CA in soils, a step towards understanding CA’s potentially significant role in microbial survival and microbe-mediated biogeochemical cycles.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85130", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85131" } }
{"authors":"Natalie Kille::University of Colorado at Boulder--Rainer M Volkamer::University of Colorado at Boulder--Sunil Baidar::University of Colorado at Boulder--Ivan Ortega::Univ of Colorado--Roman Sinreich::University of Colorado at Boulder--James Hannigan::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Owen Cooper::University of Colorado at Boulder--Eric Nussbaumer::NCAR--Gabriele Pfister::National Center for Atmospheric Research--", "title":"A12A-08: Mobile Column Measurements of HCHO, NO2, NH3, and C2H6 in Colorado during FRAPPE", "abstract":"Gases from anthropogenic sources have the potential to have a profound impact on air quality. Emissions from large cattle feedlots and ONG (Oil and Natural Gas) sites are comprised of NH3 (ammonia) and C2H6 (ethane) as pollutants. C2H6 contributes to photochemical ozone (O3) production and oxidation production of HCHO (formaldehyde). NH3 is a major source for reactive nitrogen to form particulate matter 2.5, which negatively affects human health. NO2 (nitrogen dioxide), emitted during combustion, is considered a large-scale pollutant and contributes to the formation of O3. Deploying an innovative suite of remote sensing instruments in a mobile laboratory, a Multi Axis Differential Optical Absorption Spectrometer (MAX-DOAS), a UV-Vis Spectrometer, and a Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer, we obtain mobile column measurements at high spatial and temporal resolution, 2 seconds for the UV-Vis and IR spectrometers and 20 seconds for the MAX-DOAS. Within the scope of the Front Range Air Pollution and Photochemistry Experiment (FRAPPE) we measure total columns of HCHO, NO2, NH3, and C2H6 using the University of Colorado mobile laboratory. Emissions of urban areas, agriculture, and ONG sites were studied. For the measurement of total columns the solar occultation flux method has been applied. We measured significant variability in the columns. The measurement of total columns allows one to determine the emission flux and source strength when driving a closed box around or upwind and downwind of a source with the mobile laboratory. We present results from select research drives.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85131", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85132" } }
{"authors":"Elicia Verardo::University of Bordeaux 1--Olivier Atteia::Institut Polytechnique de Bordeaux--Laurent Rouvreau::Geological survey of France (BRGM)--", "title":"H11D-1377: Management of groundwater in-situ bioremediation system using reactive transport modelling under parametric uncertainty: field scale application", "abstract":"In-situ bioremediation is a commonly used remediation technology to clean up the subsurface of petroleum-contaminated sites. Forecasting remedial performance (in terms of flux and mass reduction) is a challenge due to uncertainties associated with source properties and the uncertainties associated with contribution and efficiency of concentration reducing mechanisms. In this study, predictive uncertainty analysis of bio-remediation system efficiency is carried out with the null-space Monte Carlo (NSMC) method which combines the calibration solution-space parameters with the ensemble of null-space parameters, creating sets of calibration-constrained parameters for input to follow-on remedial efficiency. The first step in the NSMC methodology for uncertainty analysis is model calibration. The model calibration was conducted by matching simulated BTEX concentration to a total of 48 observations from historical data before implementation of treatment. Two different bio-remediation designs were then implemented in the calibrated model. The first consists in pumping/injection wells and the second in permeable barrier coupled with infiltration across slotted piping. The NSMC method was used to calculate 1000 calibration‐constrained parameter sets for the two different models. Several variants of the method were implemented to investigate their effect on the efficiency of the NSMC method. The first variant implementation of the NSMC is based on a single calibrated model. In the second variant, models were calibrated from different initial parameter sets. NSMC calibration-constrained parameter sets were sampled from these different calibrated models. We demonstrate that in context of nonlinear model, second variant avoids to underestimate parameter uncertainty which may lead to a poor quantification of predictive uncertainty. Application of the proposed approach to manage bioremediation of groundwater in a real site shows that it is effective to provide support in management of the in-situ bioremediation systems. Moreover, this study demonstrates that the NSMC method provides a computationally efficient and practical methodology of utilizing model predictive uncertainty methods in environmental management.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85132", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85133" } }
{"authors":"Gloria Jimenez::University of Arizona--Julia Cole::University of Arizona--Diane Thompson::National Center for Atmospheric Research--", "title":"PP51A-2281: Changing Trends and Variance in Eastern Equatorial Pacific Sea Surface Temperatures over the Twentieth Century", "abstract":"Global climate models and instrumental datasets often disagree regarding sea surface temperature (SST) trends in the tropical Pacific. Coral Sr/Ca records with sub-seasonal resolution provide SST proxies that complement and extend limited instrumental records. We present a new partially replicated Sr/Ca-SST record from two Galápagos corals (Isla Wolf, at 1°24’N, 91°48’W), that spans 1937-2010. The record shows high SST variance in the region, which increases nearly twofold after the late 1970s. Similarly, there is little trend in the mean until 1976, after which SSTs warm during all seasons. Both the increase in variance and the trend are strongest during the warm season, leading to progressively more anomalous conditions during El Niño events. To investigate recent changes in the eastern equatorial Pacific since the 1976/1977 climate transition, we compare the Galápagos record to a published coral Sr/Ca-SST record from Clipperton Atoll (10°18’N, 109°13’W, spanning 1874-1993; Wu et al., 2014, Palaeogeogr. Palaeoclimatol. Palaeoecol.). As in the Galápagos, Clipperton corals show increasing SSTs in all seasons after 1976. The trend at Clipperton is greater than in the Galápagos, though the variance is smaller and does not change significantly throughout the record. Finally, the north-south temperature gradient between Clipperton and Galápagos has increased slightly over the interval in which the two records overlap (1937-1993). Gridded instrumental SST data generally agree with the coral Sr/Ca-SST results, though the gridded data suggest lower variance at both sites. In sum, we show that an increase in the mean and variance of SSTs in the eastern equatorial Pacific is associated with an enhanced meridional SST gradient over the twentieth century, and especially since 1976. These results contrast with recent suggestions that a weakened meridional SST gradient in the equatorial Pacific may be leading to stronger El Niño events. Our results support the consensus that the 1976/1977 climate transition was a key turning point in the state of the tropical Pacific.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85133", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85134" } }
{"authors":"Jeffrey Kargel::University of Arizona--Brian Collins::USGS Western Regional Offices Menlo Park--Eric Fielding::Jet Propulsion Lab Caltech--Koji Fujita::Nagoya University--Umesh Haritashya::University of Dayton--Kenneth Hudnut::USGS Pasadena Field Office--Gregory Leonard::University of Arizona--Daniel Shugar::University of Washington Tacoma Campus--Akiko Sakai::Researcher--Randall Jibson::U.S. Geological Survey--", "title":"GC21F-03: Why did the Nepal Gorkha Earthquake Have so few Effects on Glacial Lakes?", "abstract":"On 25 April 2015, a magnitude 7.8 earthquake struck Nepal. Subsequently many large aftershocks shook the region, including one of magnitude 7.3. Much damage occurred and over 4000 landslides were triggered, but fortunately few earthquake effects on glacier lakes have been identified and no large glacier lake outburst floods (GLOFs) have been clearly attributed to the quakes. Why were the lakes largely unscathed? We will (1) review some cases around the world where earthquakes have apparently triggered responses among glaciers and glacier- or moraine-dammed lakes, and how these responses took place, (2) consider why earthquakes in general might not commonly have such large impacts on glacial lakes as widely expected; (3) show some case examples of glacial moraine-dammed lakes in Nepal and Tibet where few visible effects of the Gorkha earthquake (and aftershocks) were documented; and (4) consider why specifically the Gorkha earthquake (+ aftershocks) caused very few and mild effects. Earthquake shaking and steep slopes result in thousands of landslides when big earthquakes occur in mountains; furthermore, large mass movements into glacial lakes are a known trigger of many GLOFs. Worldwide there is little evidence, contrary to speculation, and now reinforced by the Gorkha quake, that earthquakes—even big ones happening near glacier lakes—are normally a major trigger of GLOFs. There may be several explanations. The Gorkha earthquake might have caused less shaking than its total released energy suggests, thus further sparing the Himalayan lakes from catastrophe. A possible further protective aspect is that glacial lakes mainly occur far up alpine valleys. It is known from other quakes that when there is shallow slip and rugged relief, surface wave modes tend to be absorbed and scattered as these waves propagate across mountain ranges, and body waves are focused into ridges, thus reducing the ground accelerations on valley floors (where lakes occur) and commonly increasing ground accelerations along some ridges. Extreme Himalayan relief may accentuate topographic control of wave scattering and amplitude diminution/enhancement known from other regions having less extreme relief. Although future big earthquakes occurring near glacial lakes remain a threat, climate change may contribute more to the threat of GLOFs.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85134", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85135" } }
{"authors":"Jing Wang::University of Maryland College Park--Dale Allen::University of Maryland College Park--Kenneth Pickering::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Zhanqing Li::University of Maryland College Park--", "title":"A21A-0079: Impact of Aerosol Direct Effect on East Asian Air Quality During the EAST-AIRE Campaign", "abstract":"Three WRF-Chem simulations were conducted for East Asia region during March 2005 East Asian Studies of Tropospheric Aerosols: an International Regional Experiment (EAST-AIRE) Intensive Observation Campaign (IOC) period to investigate the direct effects of aerosols on surface radiation and air quality. WRF-Chem captured the temporal and spatial variations of meteorological fields, trace gases, and aerosol loadings. Surface shortwave radiation changes due to the aerosol direct effect (ADE) were calculated and compared with data from six World Radiation Data Center (WRDC) stations. The comparison indicated that WRF-Chem can simulate the surface short wave radiation moderately well, with temporal correlations between 0.4 and 0.7, and high biases between 9 to 120 W/m2. Domain-wide, WRF-Chem showed a decrease of 22 W/m2 in surface SW radiation due to the aerosol direct effect, consistent with observational studies. The ADE demonstrates diverse influences on air quality in East Asian. For example, the surface concentration of PM2.5 increases in eastern China (~11.1%) due to ADE, but decreases in central China (-7.3%), western China (-8.8%), and Sichuan Basin (-4%). Surface 1-hour maximum ozone is reduced by 2.3%, owing to less radiation reaching the surface due to the ADE. Since PM2.5 pollution raises serious public concern in China, regulations that control the emissions of PM2.5 and its precursors have been implemented. We investigate the impact of reducing two different types of aerosols, sulfate (scattering) and black carbon (absorbing), by cutting 80% of SO2 and black carbon (BC) emissions in two sensitivity simulations. We found that reducing SO2 emissions results in the decline of PM2.5 as much as 16mg/m3 in eastern China, and 20mg/m3 in the Sichuan Basin. Reducing the BC emissions by the same percentage causes the PM2.5 to decrease as much as 40mg/m3 in eastern China, and 25mg/m3 in the Sichuan Basin. The monthly averaged surface 1-hour maximum ozone increases 3.1ppb in eastern China, and 4.3ppb in the Sichuan Basin with reduced BC emissions. However, there is minimal reduction of ozone with less SO2 emission.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85135", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85136" } }
{"authors":"Keley Ruehl::Sandia National Laboratories--Carlos Michelen::Sandia National Laboratories--Budi Gunawan::Sandia National Laboratories--Bret Bosma::Oregon State University--Asher Simmons::Oregon State University--Pedro Lomonaco::---", "title":"GC53C-1220: Phase 1 Validation Testing and Simulation for the WEC-Sim Open Source Code", "abstract":"WEC-Sim is an open source code to model wave energy converters performance in operational waves, developed by Sandia and NREL and funded by the US DOE. The code is a time-domain modeling tool developed in MATLAB/SIMULINK using the multibody dynamics solver SimMechanics, and solves the WEC’s governing equations of motion using the Cummins time-domain impulse response formulation in 6 degrees of freedom. The WEC-Sim code has undergone verification through code-to-code comparisons; however validation of the code has been limited to publicly available experimental data sets. While these data sets provide preliminary code validation, the experimental tests were not explicitly designed for code validation, and as a result are limited in their ability to validate the full functionality of the WEC-Sim code. Therefore, dedicated physical model tests for WEC-Sim validation have been performed. This presentation provides an overview of the WEC-Sim validation experimental wave tank tests performed at the Oregon State University’s Directional Wave Basin at Hinsdale Wave Research Laboratory. Phase 1 of experimental testing was focused on device characterization and completed in Fall 2015. Phase 2 is focused on WEC performance and scheduled for Winter 2015/2016. These experimental tests were designed explicitly to validate the performance of WEC-Sim code, and its new feature additions. Upon completion, the WEC-Sim validation data set will be made publicly available to the wave energy community. For the physical model test, a controllable model of a floating wave energy converter has been designed and constructed. The instrumentation includes state-of-the-art devices to measure pressure fields, motions in 6 DOF, multi-axial load cells, torque transducers, position transducers, and encoders. The model also incorporates a fully programmable Power-Take-Off system which can be used to generate or absorb wave energy. Numerical simulations of the experiments using WEC-Sim will be presented. These simulations highlight the code features included in the latest release of WEC-Sim (v1.2), including: wave directionality, nonlinear hydrostatics and hydrodynamics, user-defined wave elevation time-series, state space radiation, and WEC-Sim compatibility with BEMIO (open source AQWA/WAMI/NEMOH coefficient parser).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85136", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85137" } }
{"authors":"Yun Seok Yang::Korea Polar Research Institute--Jung Hun Seo::Inha University--Sung-Hyun Park::Korea Polar Research Institute--Taehoon Kim::Korea Polar Research Institute--", "title":"V53F-3169: Halogen and trace element geochemistry in Mid-Ocean Ridge basalts from the Australian-Antarctic Ridge (AAR)", "abstract":"Australian-Antarctic Ridge (AAR) is an extension of easternmost SE Indian Mid-Ocean Ridge (MOR).We collected volcanic glasses from the “in-axis” of the KR1 and KR2 MOR, and the overlapping zones of the KR1 MOR and the nearby seamounts (“KR1 mixing”). We determined trace and halogen elements in the glasses. Halogen concentrations and its ratios in the glasses are important to understand the mantle metasomatism and volatile recycling. 52 of the collected glasses are “primitive” (higher than 6 wt% MgO), while 3 of them have rather “evolved” composition (MgO wt% of 1.72, 2.95 and 4.15). K2O concentrations and Th/Sc ratios in the glasses show a negative correlation with its MgO concentration. Incompatible element ratios such as La/Sm are rather immobile during a magma differentiation so the ratios are important to understand mantle composition (Hofmann et al. 2003). La/Sm ratios in the glasses are 0.95 ~ 3.28 suggesting that the AAR basalts can be classified into T-MORB and E-MORB (Schilling et al., 1983). La/Sm ratios are well-correlated with incompatible elements such as U, Ba, Nb, and negatively correlated with compatible elements such as Sc, Eu2+, Mg. The AAR glasses contain detectable halogen elements. The “KR1 mixing” glasses in halogen elements are more abundant than “in-axis” the glasses. Cl is the least variable element compared to the other halogens such as Br and I in the AAR. The “KR1 mixing” glasses have the largest variations of Br/Cl ratios compared to the “in-axis” glasses. The Cl/Br and Th/Sc ratios in the “in-axis” glasses and in the “KR1 mixing” glasses show positive and negative correlations, respectively. The Br-rich glasses in the “KR1 mixing” zone might be explained by a recycled Br-rich oceanic slab of paleo-subduction or by a hydrothermal alteration in the AAR. I composition in the glasses does not show a correlation other trace elements. The K/Cl and K/Ti ratios in the AAR glasses are similar to the basalts from the Galapagos Spreading Center (Geldmacher et al., 2010) and Pacific MORB. The AAR region closely located with Balleny hotspot (Lanyon et al., 1993) and Pacific-Antarctic Ridge. K2O/Nb and Zr/Nb ratios are very low compared with near Pacific-Antarctic Ridge and Southeast Indian Ridge. The ratios are close to the Balleny hotspot.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85137", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85138" } }
{"authors":"Takashi Uchida::Akita University--Hiroki Sakai::Akita University--Sena Horiuchi::Akita University--Ryo Matsumoto::Meiji University--", "title":"OS23B-1992: Early Diagenesis of Subseafloor Sandy Sediments Closely Related to Gas Hydrate Occurrences and Their Provenances in the Eastern Margin of Japan Sea", "abstract":"A lot of effort have been put into recovering gas hydrate, methane induced carbonate, and associated sediments in order to develop the geologic model of gas hydrate accumulation and evaluate its possible environmental impact for the last glacial-interglacial cycles. Having investigated gas hydrate occurrences in the eastern margin of Japan Sea revealed wide distributions of chimney-shape gas hydrate concentrations beneath the seafloor, confirmed off Shimane and off Akita/Yamagata as well as off Joetsu (Niigata), which are quite different from the occurrences of pore space hydrate filling intergranular pore systems of sands recognized in Nankai Trough, Mallik and other sites. Many sediment samples have been obtained below from the Umitaka Spur, Joetsu Channel, Toyama Trough, Mogami Trough and Okushiri Ridge areas. Small amounts of sandy sediment have been retrieved as thin intercalations in Holocene and Pleistocene silty/muddy layers, where trace fossils and strong bioturbations are commonly observed. Sandy sediments consist of very fine- to fine-grained sand grains, and are sometimes tuffaceous. Pore-size distribution measurements and thin-section observations of these sands were carried out, which indicate that porosities of silty sediments are around 50 % but those of arenites range from 42 to 52 %, of which mean pore sizes and permeabilities are larger than those of silty sediments. These coarser sediments might have been transported approximately around 3 to 30 ka due to the tephra ages, where supplying sediments might be abundant due to sea level fluctuation during the Pleistocene ice age. Sandy sediments contain not only detrital quartz and feldspar but mafic minerals (pyroxene, amphibole and mica), contents of which may indicate their provenances. Silty/muddy sediments usually contain diatom tests, foraminifers and framboidal pyrites, and, in particular, the shapes of diatom are usually various, dominantly fragmental and infrequently preserved. It is remarked that physical diagenesis proceeds first due to mechanical compaction, whereas chemical diagenesis advances very slowly in early diagenesis. This study was performed as a part of the MH21 Research Consortium on methane hydrate in Japan and the METI project entitled “FY2014 promoting research and development on methane hydrate.”", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85138", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85140" } }
{"authors":"Gerard van Harten::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--David Diner::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Michael Bull::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Irina Tkatcheva::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Veljko Jovanovic::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Felix Seidel::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Michael Garay::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Feng Xu::JPL/UCLA Joint Institute for Regional Earth System Science and Engineering--Anthony Davis::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Brian Rheingans::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Russell Chipman::University of Arizona--", "title":"A43A-0261: On-board Polarimetric Calibration of Airborne Multiangle SpectroPolarimetric Imager (AirMSPI) Measurements", "abstract":"The Airborne Multiangle SpectroPolarimetric Imager (AirMSPI) aims at characterizing atmospheric aerosols and clouds using highly accurate imaging polarimetry. The instrument is deployed regularly onboard the NASA ER2 high-altitude aircraft, which is an ideal testbed for satellite remote sensing. Flying at 20 km altitude, AirMSPI’s pushbroom camera typically provides 11×11 km images at 10 m resolution. The target is observed from multiple along-track angles within ±67° using a gimbal mount. Eight spectral bands within 355-935 nm are recorded simultaneously in different detector rows, 3 of which also measure linear polarization: 470, 660 and 865 nm. Photoelastic modulators (PEMs) encode the polarized and total intensities in each polarimetric pixel as the amplitude and offset of a wavelike intensity pattern, such that the ratio of the two is insensitive to pixel-to-pixel differences. This enables an accuracy in the degree of linear polarization of ~0.001, as measured in the lab. To maintain this accuracy in-flight, an optical probe continuously monitors the PEMs’ retardances and controls their driving signals. Before and after observing a target, the instrument also observes a validator, which is an extended, polarized light source, located inside the instrument housing. These data are now incorporated in the data processing pipeline to further improve the calibration of the modulation functions. Highly polarized pixels in Earth data are utilized to transfer the validator results to meet the illumination in Earth scenes, as well as to make fine adjustments at higher temporal resolution. The reprocessed polarization products for the PODEX campaign show significant improvements when intercompared with the Research Scanning Polarimeter (RSP, Goddard Institute for Space Studies). We currently evaluate the impact of the on-board polarimetric calibration on aerosol retrievals, and compare against AERONET reference measurements.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85140", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85141" } }
{"authors":"Brad Gooch::University of Texas at Austin--Krista Soderlund::Institute for Geophysics--Duncan Young::University of Texas, Institute for Geophysics--Donald Blankenship::University of Texas, Institute for Geophysics--", "title":"C51B-0724: Heterogeneous Heat Flow and Groundwater Effects on East Antarctic Ice Sheet Dynamics", "abstract":"We present the results numerical models describing the potential contributions groundwater and heterogeneous heat sources might have on ice dynamics. A two-phase, 1D hydrothermal model demonstrates the importance of groundwater flow in heat flux advection near the ice-bed interface. Typical, conservative vertical groundwater volume fluxes on the order of +/- 1-10 mm/yr can alter vertical heat flux by +/- 50-500 mW/m2 that could produce considerable volumes of meltwater depending on basin geometry and geothermal heat production. A 1D hydromechanical model demonstrates that during ice advance groundwater is mainly recharged into saturated sedimentary aquifers and during retreat groundwater discharges into the ice-bed interface, potentially contributing to subglacial water budgets on the order of 0.1-1 mm/yr during ice retreat. A map of most-likely elevated heat production provinces, estimated sedimentary basin depths, and radar-derived bed roughness are compared together to delineate areas of greatest potential to ice sheet instability in East Antarctica. Finally, a 2D numerical model of crustal fluid and heat flow typical to recently estimated sedimentary basins under the East Antarctic Ice Sheet is coupled to a 2.5D Full Stokes ice sheet model (with simple basal hydrology) to test for the sensitivity of hydrodynamic processes on ice sheet dynamics. Preliminary results show that the enhanced fluid flow can dramatically alter the basal heating of the ice and its temperature profile, as well as, the sliding rate, which heavily alter ice dynamics.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85141", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85142" } }
{"authors":"Juliana Araujo::University of Arizona--Mark L. Brusseau::University of Arizona--", "title":"H41D-1358: Identification of Novel Fluid-Fluid Interfacial Area in Geologic Media", "abstract":"Pore-scale fluid processes in geological media are critical for applications such as oil and gas recovery, radioactive waste disposal, carbon sequestration, soil moisture distribution, soil and groundwater pollution, and land stability. The continued improvement of high-resolution image acquisition and processing methods has provided a means to directly measure pore-scale fluid processes for natural geomedia, and to test the usefulness of theoretical and computational models developed to simulate them. High-resolution synchrotron X-ray microtomography was used to measure air-water interfacial area at multiple wetting-phase saturations for natural sand. Analysis of the raw and processed image data with advanced visualization tools revealed the presence of air-water interface associated with macroscopic features such as pits and crevices on the surfaces of the solids. These features and respective fluid interfaces, which are not accounted for in current theoretical or computational models, may have a significant impact on accurate understanding and simulation of multi-phase flow, energy, heat, and mass transfer, and contaminant transport.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85142", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85143" } }
{"authors":"Ana Prados::University of Maryland Baltimore County--Brock Blevins::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Elizabeth Hook::Science Systems and Applications, Inc.--", "title":"PA33B-2196: Sharing NASA Science with Decision Makers: A Perspective from NASA’s Applied Remote Sensing Training (ARSET) Program", "abstract":"NASA ARSET http://arset.gsfc.nasa.gov  has been providing applied remote sensing training since 2008. The goals of the program are to develop the technical and analytical skills necessary to utilize NASA resources for decision-support. The program has reached over 3500 participants, with 1600 stakeholders from 100 countries in 2015 alone. The target audience for the program are professionals engaged in environmental management in the public and private sectors, such as air quality forecasters, public utilities, water managers and non-governmental organizations engaged in conservation. Many program participants have little or no expertise in NASA remote sensing, and it’s frequently their very first exposure to NASA’s vast resources. One the key challenges for the program has been the evolution and refinement of its approach to communicating NASA data access, research, and ultimately its value to stakeholders. We discuss ARSET’s best practices for sharing NASA science, which include 1) training ARSET staff and other NASA scientists on methods for science communication, 2) communicating the proper amount of scientific information at a level that is commensurate with the technical skills of program participants, 3) communicating the benefit of NASA resources to stakeholders, and 4) getting to know the audience and tailoring the message so that science information is conveyed within the context of agencies’ unique environmental challenges.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85143", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85144" } }
{"authors":"Thai Phan::National Energy Technology Laboratory Pittsburgh--Amelia Paukert::California State University Sacramento--Alexandra Hakala::National Energy Technology Laboratory Pittsburgh--", "title":"EP13B-0956: Variation in Lithium Isotopes During Fluid-Shale Interactions at Elevated Pressure and Temperature", "abstract":"Naturally-occurring isotopes are useful tracers of fluid mixing in complex natural systems, and have been applied towards evaluating the sources of elevated total dissolved solids in water produced from unconventional oil and gas operations. Prior investigations showed that elevated Li in saline waters co-produced with natural gas during Marcellus Shale development resulted from mixing of hydraulic fracturing fluid (HFF) and Li-rich formation water. However, specific contributions to the Li isotope signature from reactions between the HFF and shale remained unclear. This study focused on HFF-shale reactions that could affect the Li budget and isotope composition in Marcellus Shale produced water in a series of flow through experiments conducted at fixed temperature and pressure (66oC, 20MPa) comparable to formation conditions. Synthetic HFF was prepared by mixing either freshwater or a lab-derived saline water with chemical additives commonly used in hydraulic fracturing. Outcrop cores of Marcellus Shale were artificially fractured either parallel to or perpendicular to bedding prior to loading into the flow-through apparatus, and each experiment was performed with a unique HFF composition continuously pumped through a fresh core (15 cm in length, 3.8 cm in diameter). Initial fluid and cumulative effluents collected after 2 days and 7 days from the start of the experiment were measured for concentrations of cations and anions. Multi-collector ICP-MS was used to measure lithium isotope ratios (δ7Li). Preliminary results show that dissolution of carbonate minerals occurred in both replicate experiments with freshwater-based HFF (pH 2) as shown by a large decrease in Li/Ca from 0.8 (initial fluid) to 0.003 (effluents on day 2 and day 7) with no significant change in Li concentration. This is consistent with low Li in carbonate cement (<2%) and water soluble (<8%) and exchangeable (<2%) fractions of Marcellus Shale. Variation in δ7Li values is within analytical uncertainty (2SD=1‰) in comparison to an increase of at least 3‰ (from 1st day to >45 days after production) in produced water samples from the field. Results to date suggest that HFF-shale reactions have a minimal effect on the Li isotopic signature of Marcellus Shale produced waters.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85144", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85145" } }
{"authors":"Stephanie Taylor::University of California Santa Cruz--Emily Brodsky::University of California Santa Cruz--", "title":"EP13C-04: Relative Effects of Angularity, Grain Size, and Sorting on Auto-Acoustic Compaction in Granular Flow", "abstract":"There are thought to be three main rheological regimes exhibited within granular media in the presence of shear stress, each dependent on a dimensionless number, I, representing the relative values of collisional stress between grains and confining stress. At slow shear rates, when I<<1, the granular flow is in the quasi-static regime, and shear stress is supported elastically through multi-grain networks (force-chains). At high shear rates, when I>>1, the flow is in the grain-inertial regime, and shear stress is supported through the transfer of momentum occurring in grain-to-grain collisions. Experiments conducted using a torsional rheometer found that at intermediate shear velocities, where I approaches 1, force-chain collapse in angular sand samples produces sound waves capable of vibrating the shear zone enough to cause compaction (van der Elst et al., 2012; Lu et al., 2007). Whether or not a granular mixture exhibits this auto-acoustic compaction effect during flow has been observed to be dependent on angularity, grain size, sorting, and mineral strength: more angular grains produce more noise and compact more at intermediate shear velocities than spherical grains do, and smaller angular grains produce more noise and compact more than larger angular grains. We use the same experimental set up to explore the relative importance of the effects of angularity and grain size, comparing various grain sizes and sorting in both spherical and angular granular mixtures. Accurate assessment of the effect of angularity and grain size on rheology of granular flow will serve as a helpful predictive tool for modeling granular processes including landslides, rockslides, fault ruptures, and desert dune migrations. Grain size and shape can vary greatly system-to-system but are also often easy to observe in the field. We hope to be able to use these types of small scale grain observations to form predictions about the behavior of the larger scale process of which they are a part.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85145", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85146" } }
{"authors":"Seiichi Miura::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--Gou Fujie::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--Taro Shirai::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--Naoto Noguchi::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--Shuichi Kodaira::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--Millard Coffin::University of Tasmania--Simon Kawagle::University of Papua New Guinea--Ronald Verave::Mineral Resources Authority of Papua New Guinea--", "title":"V21A-3026: Crustal thickness of the Ontong Java Plateau and deep reflections near the base of its crust", "abstract":"The Ontong Java Plateau (OJP) is one of the largest igneous provinces (LIPs) on Earth (e.g. Coffin and Eldholm, 1994), covering an area five times that of the Japanese Islands. Moreover, studies describing the OJP as “the single largest oceanic plateau” (Taylor, 2006) and “Ontong Java Nui” (Chandler et al, 2012) suggest a much larger “original” OJP. The formation of such a huge feature does not fit plate tectonic theory, and no formation model explains all existing observations from the OJP. Formation of the OJP affected not only the solid Earth, but also the Earth’s environment. To understand its formation and environmental impacts, investigation of the crustal structure of the OJP is important. To date, crustal thickness has been ambiguous because values varied according to survey method. For example, seismic (e.g. Furumoto et al., 1976) and gravity (e.g. Sandwell and Renkin, 1988) methods yielded thicknesses of 35-42 km and 25 km, respectively. A seismic experiment using a large volume seismic source and ocean bottom seismometers (OBS) yielded a Moho depth of 35 km for the southernmost OJP via traveltime forward modeling (Miura et al., 2004), and an inversion analysis (Korenaga, 2011) showed similar results. To better understand the central OJP, we conducted an active source seismic experiment in 2010 using a large volume airgun array and 100 OBSs spaced every 5 km (Miura et al., 2011). Preliminary results with first arrival traveltime tomography and forward modeling have been reported previously (Miura et al., 2013). Recently, we applied traveltime inversion analysis (Fujie et al., 2013), incorporating the uncertainty approach of Korenaga (2011), for velocity structure modeling, especially for the depth of the Moho beneath OJP. Our analysis shows the greatest Moho depth at the center of the OJP. We will report on our latest results and propose a mechanism for formation of the OJP.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85146", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85147" } }
{"authors":"Hiroyuki Matsumoto::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--Eiichiro Araki::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--Yuya Machida::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--Toshinori Kimura::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--Shuhei Nishida::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--Katsuyoshi Kawaguchi::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--", "title":"T51D-2926: Utilization of temperature and pressure simulator for ocean-bottom and bore-hole observatories for quantitative crustal deformation", "abstract":"JAMSTEC has developed temperature and pressure simulator for ocean-bottom and bore-hole observatories in 2010, which is mainly composed of temperature chamber and hydraulic pressure standard. We call this equipment “environment simulator”. Temperature chamber is capable to control its target temperature from -10 to 180 ℃, hence it is supposed for ocean-bottom to bore-hole environment. Pressure standard in which the dead weight is mounded on the piston-cylinder module produces the reference pressure up to 100 MPa (ca. 10,000 meters deep), which makes it possible to apply the constant pressure to the pressure sensors via the hydraulic pressure tube. Thus, our environment simulator can demonstrate ocean-bottom or bore-hole environment in the laboratory. The main purpose of the pressure simulator is to evaluate long-term pressure sensor’s stability, i.e., sensor’s drift by applying the constant pressure under the constant temperature. Here, we introduce two applications of our environment simulator. The first application is to evaluate the initial behavior of pressure sensors to be used in the Dense Ocean-floor Network system for Earthquakes and Tsunamis (DONET) in the Nankai Trough, Japan. DONET pressure sensors have been deployed in order for detection of not only tsunami but also crustal deformation. We applied 20 MPa pressure under 2 ℃ temperature to the pressure sensors for one month before deploying into the deep-sea. As a result, the initial sensor drift of 5 hPa per month in maximum was measured. The second application is to provide the reference pressure to the mobile pressure sensor which is designed for the in-situ calibration for the pressure sensors being in operation. We have developed the in-situ pressure calibration tool equipped with the high precision pressure sensor. The concept is that we carry the reference pressure to the on-site to calibrate the pressure sensor. Before carrying it to the deep-sea, the reference pressure is given to the mobile pressure sensor by our environment simulator. Temperature dependencies have been also evaluated by changing the temperature under the constant pressure. Thus, our environment simulator has contributed to some applications in terms of pressure sensors for long-term monitoring of crustal deformation in the ocean.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85147", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85149" } }
{"authors":"Kenneth Williams::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--John Christensen::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Chad Hobson::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--", "title":"H31I-1546: Surface Water-Groundwater Interactions as a Critical Component of Uranium Plume Persistence", "abstract":"Residual contamination of soils, sediments and groundwater by uranium milling operations presents a lingering problem at former mill sites throughout the upper Colorado River Basin in the western USA. Remedial strategies predicated upon natural flushing by low uranium recharge waters have frequently failed to achieve target concentrations set by national and state regulators. Flushing times of tens of years have often yielded negligible decreases in groundwater uranium concentrations, with extrapolated trends suggesting multiple decades or longer may be required to achieve regulatory goals. The U.S. Department of Energy’s Rifle, Colorado field site serves as a natural laboratory for investigating the underlying causes for uranium plume persistence, with recent studies there highlighting the important role that surface water-groundwater interactions play in sustaining uranium delivery to the aquifer. Annual snowmelt-driven increases in Colorado River discharge induce 1-2 m excursions in groundwater elevation at the Rifle site, which enables residual tailings-contaminated materials (so-called Supplemental Standards) to become hydrologically connected to the aquifer for short periods of time during peak discharge. The episodic contact between shallow groundwater and residual contamination leads to abrupt 20-fold increases in groundwater uranium concentration, which serve to seasonally replenish the plume given the location of the Supplemental Standards along the upgradient edge of the aquifer. Uranium isotope composition changes abruptly as uranium concentrations increase reflecting the contribution of a temporally distinct contaminant reservoir. The release of uranium serves to potentially replenish organic matter rich sediments located within the alluvial aquifer at downstream locations, which have been postulated to serve as a parallel contributor to plume persistence following the uptake, immobilization, and slow re-oxidation of uranium.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85149", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85150" } }
{"authors":"Shaohua Zhao::Tongji University--Zhifei Liu::Tongji University--Xingxing Wang::Tongji University--Xin Xie::Tongji University--Jiangnan Shi::Tongji University--Colin Christophe::co-worker--", "title":"PP21C-2259: Downslope strengthening millennial-scale climatic change signals deduced from high-resolution clay mineralogy during the last glaciation in the northern South China Sea", "abstract":"Clay mineralogy provides a powerful tool to reconstruct glacial-cyclic paleoceanographic and paleoclimatic changes in the South China Sea. However, whether the clay mineralogy could also reserve millennial-scale climatic change is still poorly understood, because clay minerals usually produced through the long-term chemical weathering are not sensitive to the fast environmental change. This study presents the high-resolution clay mineralogy of three high-quality sediment cores, which were retrieved from a transect on the continental slope of the northern South China Sea during the cruise of MD190 (2012). Our results show that time series changes of clay mineral assemblages display a clear occurrence of millennial-scale climatic change events, such as Younger Dryas, Bolling-Allerod, and Heinrich events 1-6. The reconstructed relative contributions of clay minerals from their source areas of Taiwan and Luzon are closely related to the millennial-scale climatic changes, while the clay mineral contribution from the source area of the Pearl River presents a relationship to the sea level change. Following the transect with increasing water depths, the Pearl River contribution decreases, whereas the Taiwan and Luzon contributions present more complex changes, and the millennial-scale climatic change signals are also gradually strengthened. The Luzon/Taiwan contribution ratio is used for the proxy of the millennial-scale paleoclimate evolution. The lower ratio presents colder events, while the high ratio indicates warmer periods. The distinct downslope strengthening millennial-scale climatic change indicates that deepwater sediments in the South China Sea could well reserve fast climatic change events that usually occurred in high latitudes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85150", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85151" } }
{"authors":"Jose Palma Lizana::University of Concepcion--Jeffrey Johnson::Boise State University--Ximena Gonzalez::University of Concepcion--Oscar Valderrama::SERNAGEOMIN (National Geology and Mining Service)--", "title":"S51D-2703: Long-Term Analysis of Infrasound at Villarrica Volcano and the Eruption of March 3, 2015", "abstract":"For the last 30 years Villarrica volcano has shown persistent degassing and mild strombolian activity taking place at the lava lake located inside its crater. This activity exhibited changes in the magnitud of the strombolian explosions, levels of the lava lake, and gas emission rates. In February 2014, a six-component infrasound array was installed 8 km to the NW of the summit in order to acquire a long-term record of the acoustics associated with the explosive activity originated at Villarrica’s crater. Visual observations from the crater rim and acoustic data show that in 2014 the activity at Villarrica was relatively low and began to increase at the beginning of February 2015. Between January and early March of 2015 four complementary three-component infrasound arrays were deployed between 4 and 9 km from the crater. Villarrica volcano erupted on March 3rd, 2015, exhibiting a >1000 m high lava fountain, scoria flows, snow-ice avalanches and lahars, among other phenomena. The eruption was preceded by 25 minutes of strombolian explosions that gradually increased in magnitud and frequency until they turned into the lava fountain. The data collected with the infrasound arrays are used to identify changes in explosive activity as well as the flow of at least three lahars. Analysis of the amplitude, number of events, waveform and frequency content of the acoustic signal show small and/or short (hours to days) variations in the persistent explosive activity of Villarrica’s lava lake during 2014. The short (~27 days) increased level of activity and subsequent eruption may be interpreted as the result of a relatively gas-rich magma intruding into the upper plumbing system. ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85151", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85152" } }
{"authors":"Ashmita Sengupta::SCCWRP--Stephen Adams::Colorado State University--Eric Stein::SCCWRP--Raphael Mazor::SCCWRP--Brian Bledsoe::Colorado State University--", "title":"H11C-1362: From Gaged to Ungaged- Predicting Long-term Environmental Flows, and Ecosystems Responses.", "abstract":"Modern management needs, such as water supply, quality, and ecosystem protection place numerous demands on instream flows. Many regions are interested in developing numeric flow criteria as a way of ensuring maintenance of flow patterns that protect biological resources while meeting other demands. Developing flow criteria requires the capacity to generate reliable time series of the daily flow at any stream reach of interest and to relate flow patterns to biological indicators of stream health. Most stream reaches are not gaged, and it is impractical to develop detailed models for all reaches where flow alteration needs to be evaluated. We present a novel mechanistic approach to efficiently predict flows and flow alteration at all ungaged stream locations within a region of interest. We used an “ensemble approach” whereby a series of regionally representative models were developed and calibrated. New sites of interest are assigned to one of the ensemble models based on similarity of catchment properties. For southern California, we selected 43 gaged sites representing the range of geomorphology, and watershed characteristics of streams in the region. For each gaged site, we developed a hydrologic model (HEC-HMS) to predict daily flows for a period representing dry, wet and normal precipitation. The final goal is to relate flow alterations to ecological responses, the models were calibrated to three separate performance metrics that reflect conditions important for instream biological communities- proportion of low flow days, flashiness and Nash Sutcliffe efficiency for overall model performance. We cross-validated the models using a “jack-knife” approach. Models were assigned to novel 840 bioassessment sites based on the results of a Random Forest model that identified catchment properties that most affected the runoff patterns. Daily flow data for existing and “reference conditions” was simulated for a 23-year period for current and reference (undeveloped) conditions. The resulting hydrologic changes will be analyzed relative to changes in instream biological community structure across a gradient of disturbance in order to develop recommended flow criteria. Ultimately, we will provide a tool that can be used to evaluate the ecological response of change in hydrology across any region of interest.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85152", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85153" } }
{"authors":"Qian Yao::University of California, San Diego--Steven Day::San Diego State University--Zheqiang Shi::San Diego State University--", "title":"S43E-08: Earthquake Source Parameters Relationships from 3D Rough Fault Dynamic Rupture", "abstract":"Fault surface roughness has a strong influence on the distribution of stress around the fault, and affects the dynamics of the earthquake process. In particular, roughness influences the distribution of the parameters conventionally used to describe fault slip in, for example, kinematic modeling of strong ground motion. We explore the effect of the fault roughness on earthquake source parameters through the statistical analysis of a large suite of 3D rupture simulations. We have built a database of more than 1000 simulated dynamic ruptures based on different rough fault profiles and relative-strength (S) ratios, and have quantitatively analyzed the correlation between earthquake source parameter pairs.. In the subshear propagation-speed regime, we find the following relationships: (1) Rise time, total slip and peak slip rate each decrease with increasing roughness. (2) Rupture velocity is weakly positively related to slip, and the relationship is stronger with increasing roughness. We also explore how peak slip rate, rise time and different pairs of source parameters correlations are affected by fault roughness. This work may give useful guidance for use in kinematic rupture-source generators and help improve methods for ground strong motion prediction.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85153", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85154" } }
{"authors":"Theodore Sarris::Demokritus University of Thrace--Xinlin Li::University of Colorado at Boulder--", "title":"SM21A-2460: Local Time and Geomagnetic Activity Dependence of the Distribution of ULF Wave Power on Azimuthal Mode Numbers: Observations and Test Particle Simulations", "abstract":"An important parameter that characterizes Ultra-Low Frequency (ULF) waves, and that is critical in correctly approximating the radial diffusion that these waves can inflict on relativistic electrons in the radiation belts, is the waves' mode number, m, which describes the azimuthal wavelength of the waves. A commonly used approximation states that all ULF wave power can be assumed to be in a single mode number, usually m=1 or m=2. We use cross-spectrogram phase-differences between multiple pairs of satellites to get an estimate of m and we find that the distribution of power in the various mode numbers can be considerably different than this approximation at times; we also find a dependence of the m-distribution of power on geomagnetic conditions and on local time, with geomagnetically active times and midnight-side magnetosphere favoring higher mode numbers. We use these results in a particle tracing simulation that includes analytic expressions for the ULF waves, and we discuss their implications for radiation belt electrons.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85154", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85155" } }
{"authors":"Kelsey Winsor::University of Massachusetts Lowell--Kate Swanger::University of Massachusetts--", "title":"ED54B-06: First Thoughts About Being Outside In The Very Cold Land: Did We Get Rocks That Will Let Us Study How Warm And Wet It Was In The Past?", "abstract":"In the very cold land at the bottom of the world, ice lives under ground. How old is the ice? In some places, the ice is very old, but in other places, it's pretty young. If the ice is old, that must mean that it was always cold there. Old ice is interesting because it tells a story about old air and water. And, it means that even if the air were much warmer, the old ice could probably live. But, young ice is interesting, too. When a place has young ice, it means that it wasn't too long ago that ice could be made there. And, both kinds of under ground ice are interesting because if they turn to water, they can go into small bodies of water. There, tiny living things grow. The living things eat food brought by the water, so the ice-turned-to-water is important to their families. In this talk, we will think about a part of the very cold land at the bottom of the world, and about how old the ice is there. What ice and rocks can we use to figure this out? What does the ice look like when it's hiding under ground? These are only first thoughts, because we will only just be back from the very cold land!", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85155", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85156" } }
{"authors":"Alexander Trowbridge::Purdue University--Jordan Steckloff::Purdue University--Henry Melosh::Purdue University--Andrew Freed::Purdue University--", "title":"P51D-04: Pluto's Polygonal Terrain Places Lower Limit on Planetary Heat Flow", "abstract":"During its recent flyby of Pluto, New Horizons imaged an icy plains region (Sputnik Planum) whose surface is divided into polygonal blocks, ca. 20-30 km across, bordered by what appear to be shallow troughs. The lack of craters within these plains suggests they are relatively young, implying that the underlying material is recently active. The scale of these features argues against an origin by cooling and contraction. Here we investigate the alternative scenario that they are the surface manifestation of shallow convection in a thick layer of nitrogen ice. Typical Rayleigh-Bernard convective cells are approximately three times wider than the depth of the convecting layer, implying a layer depth of ca. 7-10 km. Our convection hypothesis requires that the Rayleigh number exceed a minimum of about 1000 in the nitrogen ice layer. We coupled a parameterized convection model with a temperature dependent rheology of nitrogen ice (Yamashita, 2008), finding a Rayleigh number 1500 to 7500 times critical for a plausible range of heat flows for Pluto’s interior. The computed range of heat flow (3.5-5.2 mW/m2) is consistent with the radiogenic heat generated by a carbonaceous chondrite (CC) core implied by Pluto’s bulk density. The minimum heat flow at the critical Rayleigh number is 0.13 mW/m2. Our model implies a core temperature of 44 K in the interior of the convecting layer. This is very close to the exothermic β-α phase transition in nitrogen ice at 35.6 K (for pure N2 ice; dissolved CO can increase this, depending on its concentration), suggesting that the warm cores of the rising convective cells may be β phase, whereas the cooler sinking limbs may be α phase. This transition may thus be observable due to the large difference in their spectral signature. Further applying our model to Pluto’s putative water ice mantle, the heat flow from CC is consistent with convection in Pluto’s mantle and the activity observed on its surface.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85156", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85157" } }
{"authors":"Scott Arko::Alaska Satellite Facility--Ian Dixon::Alaska Satellite Facility--Victoria Wolf::Alaska Satellite Facility--", "title":"H21H-1496: SMAP Radar Data and Services at the ASF DAAC", "abstract":"In January 2015 NASA launched the Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) spacecraft. SMAP’s mission was to create high-resolution soil moisture and freeze-thaw products using the combination of an L-band polarimetric synthetic aperture radar (SAR) and an L-band radiometer. Two NASA Distributed Active Archive Centers (DAACs) were tasked with distribution of the SMAP data products. The Alaska Satellite Facility (ASF) DAAC was tasked to archive and distribute the SMAP radar products. In order to best support distribution of SMAP swath radar products and SMAP users, the ASF DAAC enhanced the DAAC data system in a number of ways that will be detailed in this presentation. SMAP radar data are unique for SAR in that they are provided as half-orbit swaths over 1000km wide. This presentation will focus on two primary areas of DAAC support for SMAP. First, the ASF data discovery client, Vertex, has been updated to better support SMAP SAR data. This included enhancements to the user interface to better support swath visualizations as well as increased search capability. Utilizing NASA’s Common Metadata Repository (CMR), Vertex will allow users to download both the Level 1 SAR product as well as the higher-level products that it contributed to. In this way, the distributed nature of the data archives is better abstracted from the user experience and users have quick access to a greater variety of data. Beyond enabling data search, ASF DAAC is also supporting data utilization through the development of polar mosaics using the SAR data. SMAP is able to achieve nearly complete coverage of the Arctic north of 55 degrees every 24 hours. Based on the polarimetric SMAP data, Arctic mosaics are generated each day in geotiff format at a fixed grid spacing to allow for easy incorporation to existing workflows. Prototype ice motion products will also be shown that directly demonstrate the utility of these daily mosaics.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85157", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85158" } }
{"authors":"Anna Ruth Halberstadt::Rice University--John Anderson::Rice Univ--Lauren Simkins::Rice University--Lindsay Prothro::Rice University--Philip Bart::Louisiana State University--", "title":"C11A-0738: Ross Sea Till Properties: Implications for Ice Sheet Bed Interaction", "abstract":"Since the discovery of a pervasive shearing till layer underlying Ice Stream B, the scientific community has categorized subglacial diamictons as either deformation till or lodgement till primarily based on shear strength. Deformation till is associated with streaming ice, formed through subglacial deformation of unconsolidated sediments. Lodgement till is believed to be deposited by the plastering of sediment entrained at the base of slow-flowing ice onto a rigid bed. Unfortunately, there has been a paucity of quantitative data on the spatial distribution of shear strength across the continental shelf. Cores collected from the Ross Sea on cruises NBP1502 and NBP9902 provide a rich dataset that can be used to interpret till shear strength variability. Till strengths are analyzed within the context of: (1) geologic substrate; (2) water content and other geotechnical properties; (3) ice sheet retreat history; and (4) geomorphic framework. Tills display a continuum of shear strengths rather than a bimodal distribution, suggesting that shear strength cannot be used to distinguish between lodgement and deformation till. Where the substrate below the LGM unconformity is comprised of older lithified deposits, till shear strengths are both highly variable within the till unit, as well as highly variable between cores. Conversely, where ice streams flowed across unconsolidated Plio-Pleistocene deposits, shear strengths are low and less variable within the unit and between cores. This suggests greater homogenization of cannibalized tills, and possibly a deeper pervasive shear layer. Coarser-grained tills are observed on banks and bank slopes, with finer tills in troughs. Highly variable and more poorly sorted tills are found in close proximity to sediment-based subglacial meltwater channels, attesting to a change in ice-bed interaction as subglacial water increases. Pellets (rounded sedimentary clasts of till matrix) are observed in Ross Sea cores, suggesting a history of deformation responsible for pellet formation. Till strength was measured in a variety of environments, including mega-scale lineations and grounding zone wedges; ongoing work focuses on evaluating till shear strengths within a geomorphic context. These analyses are used to re-evaluate till genesis, transport, and characterization.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85158", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85159" } }
{"authors":"McKenzie Skiles::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Thomas Painter::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Danny Marks::USDA Agriculture Research Serv--Andrew Hedrick::USDA Agricultural Research Service New England Plant, Soil and Water Research Laboratory--", "title":"C42B-07: Integrating snow albedo from the Airborne Snow Observatory into the distributed energy balance snowmelt model iSnobal", "abstract":"Since 2013 the Airborne Snow Observatory (ASO) has been measuring spatial and temporal distribution of both snow water equivalent and snow albedo, the two most critical properties for understanding snowmelt runoff and timing, across key basins in the Western US. It is generally understood that net solar radiation (as controlled by variations in snow albedo and irradiance) provides the energy available for melt in almost all snow-covered environments. Until now, sparse measurements have restricted the ability to utilize measured net solar radiation in energy balance models, and current process simulations and model prediction of albedo evolution rely on oversimplifications of the processes. Data from ASO offers the unprecedented opportunity to utilize weekly measurements of spatially extensive spectral snow albedo to constrain and update snow albedo in a distributed snowmelt model for the first time. Here, we first investigate the sensitivity of the snow energy balance model SNOBAL to prescribed changes in snow albedo at two instrumented alpine catchments: at the point scale across 10 years at Senator Beck Basin Study Area in the San Juan Mountains, southwestern Colorado, and at the distributed scale across 25 years at Reynolds Creek Experimental Watershed, Idaho. We then compare distributed energy balance and snowmelt results across the ASO measurement record in the Tuolumne Basin in the Sierra Nevada Mountains, California, for model runs with and without integrated snow albedo from ASO.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85159", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85160" } }
{"authors":"Xiao-Ming Liu::University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill--Dalton Hardisty::University of California Riverside--Timothy Lyons::University of California Riverside--Peter Swart::University of Miami--", "title":"PP31B-2253: Evaluating the integrity of the Ce anomaly as a paleoredox tracer using modern marine carbonates", "abstract":"The redox sensitivity of cerium (Ce) relative to other rare earth elements (REEs) and its uptake in marine carbonates makes the Ce anomaly (Ce/Ce*) a particularly useful proxy for capturing local redox conditions in the water column. However, although the Ce anomaly is known to be sensitive to detrital inputs, and carbonates are generally vulnerable to multiple styles of post-depositional diagenetic alteration, evaluations of proxy-challenging complications have mostly been limited to ancient carbonates, with few constraints from younger, well-characterized analog facies. Here, we report on analyses of REE concentrations in bulk samples from well-characterized modern marine carbonate samples from the Clino and Unda drill cores in the Bahamas1. These cores sample multiple alterations: 1) meteoric/mixing zone diagenesis, 2) marine burial diagenesis, and 3) dolomitization, which collectively control secondary carbonate mineral transformations. Ce/Ce* = Ce/Pr2/Nd, calcuated using shale-normalized (i.e., PAAS) Ce, Pr, and Nd concentrations, vary with depth in modern seawater, with a range of 0.3 to 0.8 within the top 200 m depth2 and average values of 0.5-0.6 in the upper 200 m. Our results show that the REE patterns in these carbonates are very similar to those of modern seawater, indicating they may reflect primary deposition from seawater. Consistent with this assertion, anomalies in meteorically altered carbonates from the Clino core display values ranging from 0.4 to 0.8. Anomalies in the marine burial zone show larger values with smaller variations (ranging from 0.6 to 0.8) compared to the meteoric zone. This relationship may indicate that the pore fluids in the marine burial zone are more reducing compared to meteoric fluids, or differences in Ce/Ce* can be caused by changes in depositional depth. In Unda core, we observe Ce anomaly variations from an average of 0.65 in the marine burial zone to 0.62 in partially dolomitized zone. Our results, particularly the general agreement with seawater, indicate that the Ce anomaly in shallow marine carbonates has the potential to preserve records of primary deposition even in bulk carbonates with muliple styles of post-depositional diagenetic alteration. References: 1. Melim et al. (1995) Geology 23; 755-758. 2. Zhang and Nozaki (1998) GCA 62-8; 1307–1317.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85160", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85161" } }
{"authors":"Stephen Hamilton::Michigan State Univ--Mir Zaman Hussain::Michigan State University--Christopher Lowrie::Michigan State University--", "title":"H31F-1496: Watershed-scale Evapotranspiration Changed Little over 50 years of Agricultural Land Abandonment in Southern Michigan", "abstract":"The difference between precipitation and stream discharge over annual periods provides an indication of the total water loss to evaporation and evapotranspiration. The response of evaporative water loss to land cover change affects groundwater recharge, stream flow, and lake levels. This study examined the watershed water balance for Augusta Creek, which drains a 95-km2 glacial landscape in southwestern Michigan covered by cropland, grassland, forest, and wetlands. The climate is humid and temperate; between 1964-2014 the water-year precipitation averaged 948 mm and ranged from 695-1386 mm with no temporal trend. Over the study period the percentage of land in agriculture has decreased to about a third of its original extent, with abandoned lands gradually transitioning from old fields to woody vegetation. Comparison of precipitation on the upland watershed to baseflow discharge (USGS data; baseflow estimation by WHAT model) across the 50-year record shows that total evaporative water loss averaged 563 + 103 mm and ranged from 385-897 mm, with no apparent trend over the record. The evaporative water loss accounts for a mean + s.d. of 59 + 6% of precipitation (range, 48-70%). Evaporative water loss was positively related to total precipitation (r2 = 0.74. These results are interpreted using a Budyko plot framework to facilitate comparison with other settings. This water balance approach to infer evaporative water loss compares well with direct measurements in the same watershed since 2009 using eddy covariance (grasslands and crops) and soil moisture monitoring by time-domain reflectometry (grasslands, crops, and forest). Thus the evaporative water loss, which is predominantly by evapotranspiration, has been remarkably similar across a period of changing land cover, leaving a relatively consistent proportion for groundwater recharge and streamflow.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85161", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85162" } }
{"authors":"Kristen Goodrich::University of California Irvine--", "title":"GC53A-1182: The Human Dimension of Flood Risk: Towards Building Resilience in Vulnerable Communities", "abstract":"Significant advancements have been made in hydrodynamic modeling for natural disasters such as floods; however, it is vital to better understand how to effectively communicate risk to promote hazard preparedness. In many poor communities throughout the world, individuals live in areas that are hazardous because of the conditions of both the natural environment and built environment. Furthermore, environmental risks from the natural environment can be exacerbated by human development. Planning, behavioral change, and strategic actions taken by community members can mitigate risk, however, it is critical to first understand the perspective of those who are most vulnerable to (1) better communicate risk and (2) improve hazardous conditions. Thus, the Flood Resilient Infrastructure and Sustainable Environments (FloodRISE) project conducted a household level survey of over 350 participants in Los Laureles Canyon, a colonia in Tijuana, Mexico that is vulnerable to flooding. Preliminary results from the study will be discussed, specifically addressing: (1) the relationship between compounding risk factors, such as flooding and erosion, and (2) data that speaks to next steps for engaging community in the co-generation of local knowledge about flood hazards, and other strategies that contribute to more flood resilient communities.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85162", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85163" } }
{"authors":"Kelly Kilbourne::University of Maryland Center (UMCES CBL) for Environmental Science Chesapeake Biological Laboratory--Yuanyuan Xu::University of Delaware--", "title":"PP22A-04: Northern tropical Atlantic climate since late Medieval times from Northern Caribbean coral geochemistry", "abstract":"Paleoclimate reconstructions of different global climate modes over the last 1000 years provide the basis for testing the relative roles of forced and unforced variability climate system, which can help us improve projections of future climate change. The Medieval Climate Anomaly (MCA) has been characterized by a combination of persistent La Niña-like conditions, a positive North Atlantic Oscillation (+NAO), and increased Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC). The northern tropical Atlantic is sensitive to each of these climate patterns, but not all of them have the same regional fingerprint in the modern northern tropical Atlantic. The relative influence of different processes related to these climate patterns can help us better understand regional responses to climate change. The regional response of the northern tropical Atlantic is important because the tropical Atlantic Ocean is a large source of heat and moisture to the global climate system that can feedback onto global climate patterns. This study presents new coral Sr/Ca and δ18O data from the northern tropical Atlantic (Anegada, British Virgin Islands). Comparison of the sub-fossil corals that grew during the 13th and 14th Centuries with modern coral geochemical data from this site indicates relatively cooler mean conditions with a decrease in the oxygen isotopic composition of the water consistent with lower salinities. Similar average annual cycles between modern and sub-fossil Sr/Ca indicate no change in seasonal temperature range, but a difference in the relative phasing of the δ18O seasonal cycles indicates that the fresher mean conditions may be due to a more northerly position of the regional salinity front. This localized response is consistent with some, but not all of the expected regional responses to a La Niña-like state, a +NAO state, and increased AMOC. Understanding these differences can provide insight into the relative importance of advection versus surface fluxes for heat and salt balances at the study site. Ultimately the data support the existing framework for understanding climate during the MCA and demonstrate the importance of regional processes in understanding historic and future climate patterns.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85163", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85164" } }
{"authors":"Maofeng Liu::Princeton University--Gabriel Vecchi::NOAA/GFDL Princeton University--James Smith::Princeton University--", "title":"A51P-0338: Climatology of extratropical transition for North Atlantic tropical cyclones in the high-resolution GFDL climate model", "abstract":"The extratropical transition (ET) process of tropical cyclones can lead to fundamental changes in hurricane structure and storms that continue to pose large threats to life and properties. Given the importance of ET, it is necessary to understand how ET changes under a warming climate. Towards this goal, the GFDL climate model (FLOR) is first used to understand the current-day ET climatology. The standard model and a flux-adjusted version of FLOR are both used to examine ET climatology. The operational cyclone phase space method is used to define the onset and completion times of ET. The ET climatology from the climate model is compared with those from two reanalysis data sets ranging from 1979 to 2012. Both models exhibit good skills at simulating the frequency map of phase space diagram. The flux-adjusted version shows much better skill in capturing the ET climatology in terms of ET track patterns, ET locations and monthly ET variations. The model is able to simulate the frequency ratio of reintensified tropical cyclones from all ET cases. Future work involves examining changes in the ET climatology under a changing climate.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85164", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85165" } }
{"authors":"John Noto::Organization Not Listed--Rick Doe::SRI International Menlo Park--Harald Frey::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"A53A-0368: Narrowband NanoSat Scale Photometry for VUV Planetary and Heliophysics missions", "abstract":"Remote vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) soundings to support Explorer-class atmospheric research are typically enabled by large aperture, wideband spectrographs carefully pointed to measure a planet’s disk and limb regions (i.e. TIMED/GUVI and MAVEN/UVS). An alternate measurement paradigm is to identify key aeronomical emission targets (i.e HI 121.6-nm, OI 135.6-nm, N2 Lyman-Birge-Hopfield band 135 - 155 nm) and create a series of narrowband photometers each with greater in-band sensitivity (relative to a spectrograph) due to enhanced out-of-band rejection and absence of a dispersive element. Recent advances in narrowband VUV coating and PMT miniaturization have enabled design of a dual-channel nanosatellite-scale VUV photometer with flight heritage significantly leveraged from the NASA POLAR UVI imager the Air Force CubeSat Tiny Ionospheric Photometer (CTIP). Herein we present further modeled sensitivity studies and current build status of the dual-channel thermosphere/ionosphere photometer (DTIP) and address notional missions including dayside O/N2 composition, auroral energetics, nightside plasma structuring and peak layer characterization, and hydrogen geocoronal tomographic imaging.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85165", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85166" } }
{"authors":"Tyler Hoecker::University of Idaho University of Montana--Philip Higuera::University of Montana--Fengsheng Hu::University of Illinois--Ryan Kelly::university of illinois--", "title":"B34B-04: Spatiotemporal Trends in late-Holocene Fire Regimes in Arctic and Boreal Alaska", "abstract":"Alaskan arctic and boreal ecosystems are of global importance owing to their sensitivity and feedbacks to directional climate change. Wildfires are a primary driver of boreal carbon balance, and altered fire regimes may significantly impact global climate through the release of stored carbon and changes to surface albedo. Paleoecological records provide a window to how these systems respond to change by revealing climatic and disturbance variability throughout the Holocene. These long-term records highlight the sensitivity of fire regimes to climate and vegetation change, including responses to the relatively warm Medieval Climate Anomaly (MCA), and the relatively cool Little Ice Age (LIA). Over millennial timescales, boreal forests and arctic tundra have been resilient to climate change, but continued directional climate change may result in novel vegetation compositions and fire regimes, with potentially significant implications for global climate. Here we present a spatiotemporal synthesis of 22 published sediment-charcoal records from three Alaskan ecoregions. We add to this network eight records collected in June 2015 from an additional ecoregion. Variability in fire return intervals (FRIs) was quantified within and among ecoregions and climatic periods spanning the past 2 millennia, based on a peak analysis representing local fire events. Preliminary results suggest that fire regimes were responsive to centennial-scale climatic shifts, including the MCA and LIA, but the degree of sensitivity varies by ecoregion. Over the past 2000 years, FRIs were shortest during the MCA, indicating the potential for climate warming to promote high rates of burning. FRIs in tundra regions of northwestern Alaska and in interior boreal forests were 20% shorter during the MCA than during the LIA, and 25% shorter in boreal forest in the south-central Brooks Range. Burning was likely promoted during the warmer, drier MCA through lower fuel moisture. Quantifying fire-regime response to climate forcing across multiple ecoregions helps reveal the mechanisms that connect fire and climate in Alaskan ecosystems.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85166", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85167" } }
{"authors":"Isaac Crumbly::Fort Valley State University--Jackie Hodges::Fort Valley State University--Aditya Kar::Fort Valley State University--Lisa Rashidi::Fort Valley State University--", "title":"ED22A-06: “Fort Valley State University Cooperative Developmental Energy Program: Broadening the Participation of Underrepresented Minorities in the Geosciences”", "abstract":"According to the American Geological Institute's Status of Recent Geoscience Graduates, 2014, underrepresented minorities (URMs) make up only 7%, 5%, and 2% of graduates at the BS/BA, MA/MS, and Ph.D levels, respectively. Recruiting academically-talented URMs to major in the geosciences instead of majoring in other fields such as medicine, law, business, or engineering is a major undertaking. Numerous factors may contribute as to why few URMs choose geoscience careers. To address the underrepresentation of URMs in the geosciences 1992, the Cooperative Developmental Energy Program (CDEP) of Fort Valley State University (FVSU) and the College of Geosciences at the University of Oklahoma (OU) implemented a 3 + 2 dual degree program specifically in geology and geophysics. Since 1992, FVSU-CDEP has added the University of Texas at Austin (2004), Pennsylvania State University (2005), University of Arkansas (2010), and the University of Nevada at Las Vegas (2015) as partners to offer degrees in geology and geophysics. The dual degree programs consist of students majoring in chemistry or mathematics at FVSU for the first three years and transferring to one of the above partnering universities for years four and five to major in geology or geophysics. Upon completion of the program, students receive a BS degree in chemistry or mathematics from FVSU and a BS degree in geology or geophysics from a partnering university.  CDEP has been responsible for recruiting 33 URMs who have earned BS degrees in geology or geophysics. Females constitute 50% of the graduates which is higher than the national average. Also, 56% of these graduates have earned the MS degree and 6% have earned the Ph.D. Currently, 60% of these graduates are employed with oil and gas companies; 20% work for academia; 12% work for governmental agencies; 6 % are professionals with environmental firms; and 2% of the graduate’s employment is unknown.  ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85167", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85168" } }
{"authors":"Xinqing Liang::University of California Santa Cruz--David Smith::University of California Santa Cruz--Gregory Bowers::University of California Santa Cruz--Robyn Millan::Dartmouth College--", "title":"SM21B-2517: Microburst precipitation observed during the BARREL balloon campaigns", "abstract":"During the BARREL (Balloon Array for Radiation belt Relativistic Electron Losses) campaign in 2013/2014, several episodes of microburst (10 - 100s keV with time scales of 100s ms) precipitation were observed. A few of these events were observed by multiple balloons. In this study we will discuss the context of these events in terms of geomagnetic indice AE, location relative to the plasmapause as well as their L and MLT. We will also compare the temporal structure of microburst episodes between events and between payloads at different geographic locations, specifically with respect to the region of the south atlantic anomaly. This will allow us to consider the effect of temporal dispersion due to particle drift for particles near but outside of the bounce loss cone and within the drift loss cone. We will investigate whether the common, soft, apparently non-bursty precipitation events observed by balloons might be drifted microburst precipitation, and therefore also generated by the same source as the very structured microbursts.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85168", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85169" } }
{"authors":"Yoshinori Tange::Japan Synchrotron Radiation Research Institute--Norimasa Ozaki::Osaka University--Takeshi Matsuoka::Osaka University--Tsuyoshi Ogawa::Osaka University--Bruno Albertazzi::Osaka University--Hideaki Habara::Osaka University--Kenjiro Takahashi::Osaka University--Satoshi Matsuyama::Osaka University--Kazuto Yamauchi::Osaka University--Kazuo Tanaka::Osaka University--R. Kodama::Osaka University--Tomoko Sato::Hiroshima University--Toshimori Sekine::Hiroshima University--Yusuke Seto::Kobe University--Takuo Okuchi::Okayama University--Toshinori Yabuuchi::RIKEN SPring-8 Center--Yuichi Inubushi::Japan Synchrotron Radiation Research Institute--Makina Yabashi::Japan Synchrotron Radiation Research Institute--", "title":"MR13C-2721: In situ XFEL measurement system for Earth and planetary materials under laser-induced ultrahigh-pressure conditions", "abstract":"High-pressure and high-temperature in situ experiments have revealed behaviors of the earth and planetary constituents under extreme conditions, and contribute to progress our understandings about physical and chemical structure of planetary interiors. These in situ techniques have developed with the third-generation synchrotron radiation facilities such as APS, ESRF, and SPring-8 mainly using large volume presses and diamond anvil cells. In addition to the synchrotron light source, recently X-ray free electron laser (XFEL) facilities have been developed as LCLS and SACLA. The brilliant and extremely short-pulsed XFELs make it possible to carry out femto-second time-resolve measurements, and to observe materials under dynamic/shock compression clearly. Techniques using high-power laser and XFEL are expected to be a next-generation experimental platform, and a pump-probe measurement system using high-power lasers and XFEL was installed at BL3EH5 in SPring-8/SACLA interoperable experimental facility. The system is composed of 45 TW <ns short-pulse laser, 2-dimentional <μm X-ray focusing system (KB mirrors), vacuumed sample chamber, and the MPCCD detector developed for the 10-fs ultra-short pulsed XFEL light source. The high-power laser enables us to generate up to 100 GPa for metal, simple oxide, and natural/synthesized mineral samples. Samples are mounted on sample holders and aligned at the center of the vacuum chamber using a 4-axis Goniometer head. In this presentation, we will overview the experimental setups and typical results of current pump-probe system using XFEL in SACLA.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85169", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85170" } }
{"authors":"Melinda Dyar::Mount Holyoke College--C Carey::University of Massachusetts Amherst--Laura Breitenfeld::Mount Holyoke College--Thomas Tague::Bruker Optics, Inc.--Peng Wang::Bruker Optics, Inc.--", "title":"P31A-2041: Automatic Whole-Spectrum Matching Techniques for Identification of Pure and Mixed Minerals using Raman Spectroscopy", "abstract":"In situuse of Raman spectroscopy on Mars is planned for three different instruments in the next decade. Although implementations differ, they share the potential to identify surface minerals and organics and inform Martian geology and geochemistry. Their success depends on the availability of appropriate databases and software for phase identification. For this project, we have consolidated all known publicly-accessible Raman data on minerals for which independent confirmation of phase identity is available, and added hundreds of additional spectra acquired using varying instruments and laser energies. Using these data, we have developed software tools to improve mineral identification accuracy. For pure minerals, whole-spectrum matching algorithms far outperform existing tools based on diagnostic peaks in individual phases. Optimal matching accuracy does depend on subjective end-user choices for data processing (such as baseline removal, intensity normalization, and intensity squashing), as well as specific dataset characteristics. So, to make this tuning process amenable to automated optimization methods, we developed a machine learning-based generalization of these choices within a preprocessing and matching framework. Our novel method dramatically reduces the burden on the user and results in improved matching accuracy. Moving beyond identifying pure phases into quantification of relative abundances is a complex problem because relationships between peak intensity and mineral abundance are obscured by complicating factors: exciting laser frequency, the Raman cross section of the mineral, crystal orientation, and long-range chemical and structural ordering in the crystal lattices. Solving this un-mixing problem requires adaptation of our whole-spectrum algorithms and a large number of test spectra of minerals in known volume proportions, which we are creating for this project. Key to this effort is acquisition of spectra from mixtures of pure minerals paired with a standard reference (diamond); the ratios of their peak areas are independent of laser energy and normalization techniques and are analogous to molar absorptivities. With these test data and our advanced algorithms, quantitative estimates of mineral modes can be accurately derived from Raman spectra of mixtures.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85170", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85171" } }
{"authors":"Jeffrey Bielicki::Ohio State University Main Campus--Benjamin Adams::University of Minnesota Twin Cities--Hyungjin Choi::University of Minnesota Twin Cities--Martin Saar::University of Minnesota--Steven Taff::University of Minnesota Twin Cities--Bolormaa Jamiyansuren::University of Minnesota Twin Cities--Thomas Buscheck::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--Jonathan Ogland-Hand::Ohio State University Main Campus--", "title":"GC53C-1222: The Efficacy and Potential of Renewable Energy from Carbon Dioxide that is Sequestered in Sedimentary Basin Geothermal Resources", "abstract":"Mitigating climate change requires increasing the amount of electricity that is generated from renewable energy technologies and while simultaneously reducing the amount of carbon dioxide (CO2) that is emitted to the atmosphere from present energy and industrial facilities. We investigated the efficacy of generating electricity using renewable geothermal heat that is extracted by CO2 that is sequestered in sedimentary basins. To determine the efficacy of CO2-Geothermal power production in the United States, we conducted a geospatial resource assessment of the combination of subsurface CO2 storage capacity and heat flow in sedimentary basins and developed an integrated systems model that combines reservoir modeling with power plant modeling and economic costs. The geospatial resource assessment estimates the potential resource base for CO2-Geothermal power plants, and the integrated systems model estimates the physical (e.g., net power) and economic (e.g., levelized cost of electricity, capital cost) performance of an individual CO2-Geothermal power plant for a range of reservoir characteristics (permeability, depth, geothermal temperature gradient). Using coupled inverted five-spot injection patterns that are common in CO2-enhanced oil recovery operations, we determined the well pattern size that best leveraged physical and economic economies of scale for the integrated system. Our results indicate that CO2-Geothermal plants can be cost-effectively deployed in a much larger region of the United States than typical approaches to geothermal electricity production. These cost-effective CO2-Geothermal electricity facilities can also be capacity-competitive with many existing baseload and renewable energy technologies over a range of reservoir parameters. For example, our results suggest that, given the right combination of reservoir parameters, LCOEs can be as low as $25/MWh and capacities can be as high as a few hundred MW.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85171", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85172" } }
{"authors":"Maya Becker::Columbia University of New York Scripps Institution of Oceanography--Frank Nitsche::Lamont -Doherty Earth Observatory--", "title":"C21A-0705: Tracing West Antarctic Iceberg Origins through Scour Depth Analyses", "abstract":"Icebergs form along coasts at the glacier ice-ocean interface through calving. It is critical that we understand the effects of Antarctic calving in a changing climate. One such effect is that of iceberg scouring: If icebergs are thick enough, they can run aground, leaving scours in the seabed. One recent study relied on radar altimetry to construct hypothetical Antarctic iceberg keel depths, linking them to three different types of parent ice. The purpose of this study is to determine the average water depths at which real scours—digitized from multibeam sonar bathymetry data—occur for several sections of the seafloor off of West Antarctica and compare the depths with those generated by the earlier study. Depth analyses for scours seaward of the Ross Ice Shelf, Getz Ice Shelf, and Pine Island and Thwaites glaciers and in the northeast Bellingshausen Sea indicate a substantial difference from the projected radar altimetry results. All six areas register average depths greater than 450 meters. For five of the six areas examined, the observed scours occur at deeper water depths on average than would the scours projected by the radar altimetry study. This difference holds for four of those five areas even after the application of a 130-meter sea-level correction—an upper-bound estimate for the sea-level drop associated with the Last Glacial Maximum. This suggests a fundamental dissimilarity between the projected calving dimensions and those of the icebergs responsible for the scours examined here. As iceberg geometry is primarily controlled by parent ice mass thickness, we can also extend this difference to the source ice in each study. These results allow us to make inferences about iceberg life cycles, trajectories, and grounding patterns off of West Antarctica. They can help scientists better understand patterns of mass loss and freshwater input into the Southern Ocean, processes that ultimately lead to sea-level rise.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85172", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85173" } }
{"authors":"Aibing Li::University of Houston--Lun Li::University of Houston--Michael Murphy::University of Houston--Olufemi Akanbi::University of Houston--", "title":"S23D-2769: Radial Anisotropy in the Lithosphere and Asthenosphere Beneath the Northeastern Tibetan Plateau from Surface Wave Tomography", "abstract":"We analyzed Rayleigh and Love wave data from distant earthquakes recorded by 36 broadband stations that were operated in two years in the NE Tibetan Plateau. Phase velocity variations were determined in a period range of 20 to 91 s for Love wave and 20 to 100 s for Rayleigh wave using a two-plane-wave method, which can accounts for non-planar energy in the incoming wave field caused by structures outside the study area. 3-D shear wave velocity and radial anisotropy models were constructed from the obtained Rayleigh and Love wave dispersions. The mid-lower crust is characterized by strong positive anisotropy (VSH>VSV) beneath the Qilian-Qinling Orogen and relative weak radial anisotropy beneath the Kunlun Mountains. The mantle above 90 km is largely isotropic while positive anisotropy increases gradually with depth below 90 km, which probably marks the lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary (LAB). In contrast, shear wave velocity does not show an obvious reduction at 90 km and fails to detect the LAB. A low shear wave velocity anomaly and relatively negative radial anisotropy are imaged in the entire lithosphere under the Kunlun restraining bend, indicating a weak lithosphere under compressional deformation. The asthenosphere here is characterized by significantly lower velocity and stronger positive anisotropy than the surrounding region, suggesting a warmer and weaker asthenosphere block. Our observations are consistent with a geologic model in which the lithosphere under the restraining bend was thickened and subsequently delaminated, and the warm asthenosphere then filled up the space left by the delamination.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85173", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85174" } }
{"authors":"Zorana Jelenak::NOAA College Park--Paul Chang::NOAA Science Center--Michael Brennan::NOAA/NWS/NCEP/National Hurricane Center--Joseph Sienkiewicz::NOAA/National Weather Service--", "title":"IN32A-08: Impact of Scatterometer Ocean Wind Vector Data on NOAA Operations", "abstract":"Near real-time measurements of ocean surface vector winds (OSVW), including both wind speed and direction from non-NOAA satellites, are being widely used in critical operational NOAA forecasting and warning activities. The scatterometer wind data data have had major operational impact in: a) determining wind warning areas for mid-latitude systems (gale, storm,hurricane force); b) determining tropical cyclone 34-knot and 50-knot wind radii. c) tracking the center location of tropical cyclones, including the initial identification of their formation. d) identifying and warning of extreme gap and jet wind events at all latitudes. e) identifying the current location of frontal systems and high and low pressure centers. f) improving coastal surf and swell forecasts Much has been learned about the importance and utility of satellite OSVW data in operational weather forecasting and warning by exploiting OSVW research satellites in near real-time. Since December 1999 when first data from QuikSCAT scatterometer became available in near real time NOAA operations have been benefiting from ASCAT scatterometer observations on MetOp-A and B, Indian OSCAT scatterometer on OceanSat-3 and lately NASA’s RapidScat mission on International Space Station. With oceans comprising over 70 percent of the earth’s surface, the impacts of these data have been tremendous in serving society’s needs for weather and water information and in supporting the nation’s commerce with information for safe, efficient, and environmentally sound transportation and coastal preparedness. The satellite OSVW experience that has been gained over the past decade by users in the operational weather community allows for realistic operational OSVW requirements to be properly stated for future missions. Successful model of transitioning research data into operation implemented by Ocean Winds Team in NOAA’s NESDIS/STAR office and subsequent data impacts will be presented and discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85174", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85175" } }
{"authors":"Kensuke Nakajima::Kyushu Univ--Yukiko Yamada::Hokkaido University--Yoshiyuki Takahashi::Kobe University--Masaki Ishiwatari::Hokkaido University--Wataru Ohfuchi::Earth Simulator Ctr--Yoshi-Yuki Hayashi::Kobe University--", "title":"A51F-0127: Resolution Dependence of Equatorial Precipitation Activities Represented in a General Circulation Model with No Cumulus Parameterization", "abstract":"An aquaplanet experiment is performed to explore how representation of equatorial precipitation activities in a GCM depends on its horizontal resolution. The numerical model utilized is AFES, an AGCM optimized for the Earth Simulator (Ohfuchi et al 2004). For the sake of simplicity, we adopt no cumulus parametarizetion scheme, although large scale condensation scheme is retained. We compare the results with increasing horizontal resolution from T39 to T319. Other setups follows those of the CONTROL case of the Aqua Planet Experiment (APE) Project (Neale and Hoskins, 2000; Blackburn and Hoskins, 2013). We can identify two kinds of resolution dependences; one is zonal and the other is meridional. Zonally, at lower horizontal resolution, precipitation occurs as disturbances with the scale of a few gridpints, and propagate both eastward and westward. As the resolution increases, zonal scale of precipitation disturbances decreases, and there appears a hierarchical structure: grid scale disturbances move westward, while they are organized into eastward moving, Kelvin wave like envelopes. The westward motion of grid scale precipitation structure can be related to the advection of inhomogeniety of moisture by the zonal mean wind. Another kind of large scale organization identified is the north-south ` zigzag`  structure of the distribution of grid scale precipitation disturbances, which has zonal wavenumber two and propagates westward. This structure appear only when the model can resolve the moist equatorial radius of deformation, and can be interpreted as moist mixed-Rossby gravity wave. The Mixed-Rossby gravity wave and the Kelvin wave like structure occur superposed to each other. Features similar to the above can also be noted in some of the AGCM runs with cumuls parameterizations in the APE (Blackburn et al, 2013; Williamson et al 2013; Nakajima et al 2013). Acknowledgement: Numerical experiments were performed at the Earth Simulator, JAMSTEC.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85175", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85176" } }
{"authors":"Makiko Hashimoto::JAXA Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency--Teruyuki Nakajima::JAXA Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency--Hideaki Takenaka::JAXA Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency--RIko Higuchi::RESTEC--Mayumi Yoshida::RESTEC--", "title":"A11A-0007: Data calibration and aerosol remote sensing using GOSAT/CAI and a plan for GOSAT-2/CAI-2", "abstract":"The GOSAT launched on January 23, 2009 is a satellite to monitor the concentration of greenhouse gases from space. CAI mounted on-board the satellite is an imaging sensor for cloud and aerosol and observes reflected sunlight from the atmosphere and surface of the ground. The sensor has four bands from near ultraviolet (near-UV) to shortwave infrared. The data has not been calibrated adequately beyond 2010, so we conducted several corrections, such as geometric, band-to-band registration and stripe correction, and vicarious or cross calibration using MODIS data. We would like to introduce those correction and calibration result. And also, we would like to show comparison results between before and after data correction and calibration and some data analysis of GOSAT/CAI to retrieve aerosol properties using multi-wavelength and multi-pixel algorithm (MWPM).  At the same time we would like to show a plan for analysis for aerosol remote sensing using GOSAT-2/CAI-2. CAI-2 is planned to be implemented two different viewing angles with enhanced channel allocation including 340nm. It should be discussed a careful building of aerosol analysis system for such new functions with CAI-2.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85176", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85177" } }
{"authors":"Cameron Mercer::Arizona State University--Kip Hodges::Arizona State University--Bradley Jolliff::Washington University--Matthijs Van Soest::Arizona State University--Jo-Anne Wartho::GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel--John Weirich::Planetary Science Institute Tucson--", "title":"P33C-2136: High Spatial Resolution 40Ar/39Ar Geochronology of Impact Melt Breccias from Apollo 17 Boulders at Stations 2, 6, and 7", "abstract":"Several boulders located at the bases of the North and South Massifs were among the primary field targets of the Apollo 17 mission to the Taurus-Littrow Valley on the Moon [1]. Some boulders are polylithologic, including Boulder 1 at Station 2 and the boulders at Stations 6 and 7. These boulders were the subjects of consortium studies [2, 3] that included 40Ar/39Ar geochronology to determine the ages of distinct lithologies within each boulder [e.g., 4-6]. We report new 40Ar/39Ar data for the impact melt breccias 72255, 76315, 77075, and 77135 obtained using the UV laser ablation microprobe (UVLAMP) methods of [7]. For 72255, we obtained a preliminary isochron date ca. 3814 Ma from 22 melt analyses, which is younger than published plateau dates (e.g., 3951-3835 Ma [4, 8]). Fifteen melt analyses of 76315 yield a preliminary isochron date ca. 3850 Ma, younger than the 3900 ± 16 Ma date reported by [8]. Melt analyses of 77075 yield preliminary dates between ca. 3797-3584 Ma, possibly reflecting partial loss of 40Ar. In this case, the oldest date may provide a minimum age for the formation of melt in 77075. Finally, the UVLAMP dates for the 77135 melt range from 3810-3361 Ma and corresponding Ca/K ratios range from ca. 100-6. Electron microprobe analyses of small (ca. 10s of microns wide) pockets of K-rich materials show that both K-rich glass and K-feldspar are present. The UVLAMP dates for 77135 likely reflect spatially variable 40Ar loss, consistent with published step heating results [e.g., 6]. References: [1] Schmitt (1973) Science, 182, 681–690. [2] Ryder (1993). Catalog of Apollo 17 Rocks: Volume 1 – Stations 2 and 3 (South Massif). LPI. [3] Ryder (1993). Catalog of Apollo 17 Rocks: Volume 4 – North Massif. LPI. [4] Leich et al. (1975) The Moon, 14, 407–444. [5] Cadogan & Turner (1976). LPSC, 7, 2267–2285. [6] Stettler et al. (1978). LPSC, 9, 1113–1115. [7] Mercer et al. (2015) Sci. Adv., 1, e1400050. [8] Dalrymple & Ryder (1996). JGR, 101, 26069–26084.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85177", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85178" } }
{"authors":"Scott Kalafatis::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--", "title":"GC11D-1061: Using Co-production to Enhance Co-production: Cultivating institutional capacity through exchange between climate science, social science, and practice", "abstract":"Many climate scientists and boundary organizations have accumulated years of experience providing decision support for climate adaptation related to landscape change. The Great Lakes Integrated Sciences + Assessments (GLISA) is one such organization that has developed a reputation for providing stakeholders with climate change decision support throughout the Great Lakes region of North America. After five years of applied outreach, GLISA climate scientists working with practitioners identified three common limitations across projects that were slowing down the use of information, describing them as mismatched terminology, unrealistic expectations, and disordered integration. Discussions with GLISA-affiliated social scientists revealed compelling parallels between these observations and the existing social science literature on the persistent “usability gap” in information use as well as opportunities to preemptively overcome these barriers. The discovery of these overlaps between the climate scientists’ experience of barriers and the social science literature as well as strategies to systematically address them demonstrate the potential for boundary organizations to act as incubators of more and more efficient co-production over time. To help illustrate these findings, this presentation also provides an example of decision-making for adaptation in the face of landscape change in which GLISA scientists assisted Isle Royale National Park with assessing the implications of future ecological transitions for current wildlife management efforts.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85178", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85179" } }
{"authors":"Barbara Lafuente::University of Arizona--Nate Stone::Open Data Repository--Robert Downs::University of Arizona--David Blake::NASA Ames Research Center--Thomas Bristow::NASA Ames Research Center--Mark Fonda::NASA Ames Research Center--Alex Pires::University of Arizona--", "title":"IN41D-03: The Astrobiology Habitable Environments Database (AHED)", "abstract":"The Astrobiology Habitable Environments Database (AHED) is a central, high quality, long-term searchable repository for archiving and collaborative sharing of astrobiologically relevant data, including, morphological, textural and contextural images, chemical, biochemical, isotopic, sequencing, and mineralogical information. The aim of AHED is to foster long-term innovative research by supporting integration and analysis of diverse datasets in order to: 1) help understand and interpret planetary geology; 2) identify and characterize habitable environments and pre-biotic/biotic processes; 3) interpret returned data from present and past missions; 4) provide a citable database of NASA-funded published and unpublished data (after an agreed-upon embargo period). AHED uses the online open-source software “The Open Data Repository’s Data Publisher” (ODR - http://www.opendatarepository.org ) [1], which provides a user-friendly interface that research teams or individual scientists can use to design, populate and manage their own database according to the characteristics of their data and the need to share data with collaborators or the broader scientific community. This platform can be also used as a laboratory notebook. The database will have the capability to import and export in a variety of standard formats. Advanced graphics will be implemented including 3D graphing, multi-axis graphs, error bars, and similar scientific data functions together with advanced online tools for data analysis (e. g. the statistical package, R). A permissions system will be put in place so that as data are being actively collected and interpreted, they will remain proprietary. A citation system will allow research data to be used and appropriately referenced by other researchers after the data are made public. This project is supported by the Science-Enabling Research Activity (SERA) and NASA NNX11AP82A, Mars Science Laboratory Investigations. [1] Nate et al. (2015) AGU, submitted.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85179", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85180" } }
{"authors":"Raymond Sambrotto::Columbia Univ--", "title":"GC31A-1162: Parameterizing ice-edge biological productivity in a changing Arctic: Growth factors associated with specific ice provenances", "abstract":"Sea ice plays a significant role in the ecology of polar seas and a significant portion of the biological production in the Arctic occurs at ice edges. These environments are inherently variable in space and time and subject to climate variation as the summer ice extent changes. Recent field results from the northern Bering Sea suggest that the parameterization of ice edge production in coupled physical-biological models that ignore processes specific to the ice-melt environment will be insufficient to describe the variability and intensity of Arctic production. In addition to the stabilizing the surface layer, ice may contribute phytoplankton growth factors such as trace metals that have been derived from the regions of ice formation as well as aeolian deposition. Results of an analysis of sea ice formation, flow and melt suggests regions that are likely to receive trace metals from ice and has been validated with regions of known ice edge productivity in the Bering Sea. A similar analysis for the Chukchi Sea compared the likely ice-edge productivity regions between pre-2000 ice conditions and those in the more recent period of reduced summer ice cover. Changes are predicted in both the timing and distribution of these regions in proportion to the variations in the dominant ice flow patterns. Ways in which the non-local processes important to elevated ice edge productivity can be incorporated into couple arctic models will be discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85180", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85181" } }
{"authors":"Steven Dibb::University of California Santa Cruz--Susan Ustin::University of California Davis--Shane Grigsby::University of Colorado at Boulder--", "title":"GC23K-1240: Using high-resolution topography and hyperspectral data to classify tree species at the San Joaquin Experimental Range", "abstract":"Air- and space-borne remote sensing instruments allow for rapid and precise study of the diversity of the Earth's ecosystems. After atmospheric correction and ground validation are performed, the gathered hyperspectral and topographic data can be assembled into a stack of layers for land cover classification. Data for this project were collected in multiple field campaigns, including the 2013 NSF NEON California campaign and 2015 NASA SARP campaign. Using hyperspectral and high resolution topography data, 25 discriminatory attributes were processed in Exelis' ENVI software and collected for use in a decision forest to classify the four major tree species (Blue Oak, Live Oak, California Buckeye, and Foothill Pine) at the San Joaquin Experimental Range near Fresno, CA. These attributes include 21 classic vegetation indices and a number of other spectral characteristics, such as color and albedo, and four topographic layers, including slope, aspect, elevation, and tree height. Additionally, a number of nearby terrain classes, including bare earth, asphalt, water, rock, shadow, structures, and grass were created. Fifty training pixels were used for each class. The training pixels for each tree species came from collected GPS points in the field. Ensemble bootstrap aggregation of decision trees was performed in MATLAB, and an arbitrary number of 500 trees were selected to be grown. The tree that produced the minimum out-of-bag classification error (4.65%) was selected to classify the entire scene. Classification results accurately distinguished between oak species, but was suboptimal in dense areas. The entire San Joaquin Experimental Range was mapped with an overall accuracy of 94.7% and a Kappa coefficient 0.94. Finally, the Commission and Omission percentage averages were 5.3% each. A highly accurate map of tree species at this scale supports studies on drought effects, disease, and species-specific growth traits.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85181", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85182" } }
{"authors":"Jeffrey Richey::University of Washington--Alex Krusche::CENA Center for Nuclear Energy in Agriculture--Victoria Ballester::CENA Center for Nuclear Energy in Agriculture--", "title":"H41H-04: The Pulse of the Amazon River System: How pCO2 Evolves, from Small Streams to the Atlantic Ocean", "abstract":"A long-standing paradigm of river networks is that they are minor components in the global carbon cycle, passively connecting the land and ocean reservoirs. But recent research in the Amazon and globally show that the opposite is true- that fluvial systems are highly active, dynamic processors of organic carbon of terrestrial and aquatic origin, releasing CO2 back to the atmosphere. That said, knowledge of how the fluvial system processes carbon and nutrients requires being able to track carbon processes throughout a basin, not just at select points; i.e., how do the pathways and fluxes of organic matter, nutrients, and associated elements evolve through river corridors, from the land-water interface to the ocean? The problem in understanding fluvial carbon dynamics at scales larger than relatively easily measured discrete streams is determining the spatial and temporal distributions across such a range of environments. This is a mesoscale question, where it is necessary to understand the distribution of moisture regimes and biogeochemical processes at scales of ~10,000–100,000 km2 and up. Here we examine the spatial-temporal distributions of pCO2 across the Amazon River system. Because of the vast and remote nature of the Amazon basin, the logistics of establishing a comprehensive and representative sampling network are considerable. The Rede Beija Rio network was established to conduct such measurements, wherein each node is occupied by a team of researchers from that site. Results showed pronounced consistency. For example, pCO2 tracked the hydrograph at all sites, with maximum concentrations at high water, and minima at low. pCO2 at low water ranges from 500 μatm in the Rio Araguaia and Rio Ji-Paraná to 1000 μatm in the Rio Solimões, to 2000 μatm in the Rio Negro. High water concentrations exhibit a broader range and higher magnitude, from 3000 μatm (Rio Pimento Bueno) to 5000 μatm in the Rio Solimões and 7000 μatm in the lower Rio Negro. Interestingly, pCO2 in the far upper Rio Negro, where pH is in the 3.5 range, had lower concentrations than at the mouth. The highest observed values were 20,000 μatm in Campinas, a blackwater tributary of the Rio Negro. These patterns are reflected in major and minor ions, nutrients, sediments and sediment composition.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85182", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85184" } }
{"authors":"Frank Niepold::NOAA Washington DC--Tamara Ledley::Technical Education Research Centers--Jeff Lockwood::TERC--Elizabeth Youngman::Busy Bee Productions--Cheryl Manning::Cheryl Manning Science Education Consulting--Susan Sullivan::University of Colorado at Boulder--", "title":"ED31F-01: Education for a Green and Resilient Economy: An Educator Framework for Teaching Climate and Energy Literacy for K-12 Teachers Across the Curriculum", "abstract":"The U.S. is embarking on a major transition to a green and resilient economy, a monumental change requiring all sectors and segments of the population to pull together. Transforming our nation’s economic, energy, and environmental systems to in this way will require a sustained level of expertise, innovation, and cooperative effort unseen since the 1940s to meet the challenges involved. Education can – and must – help people understand the true connections, the linkages and interdependencies, between the environment, our energy sources and the economy which underpin and form the very foundation of the concept of a green and resilient economy. To produce such a literate future workforce and citizenry, the United States will need to make major new investments in our educational systems. Teachers across the nation are helping to increase science-based understanding and awareness of current and future climate change, enhancing climate and energy literacy in K-12 classrooms, on college and university campuses. There has been tremendous progress to date, but there is still more work to be done.  The new academic standards in mathematics and science (the Common Core State Standards in Mathematics and the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS)) represent a sea change from the nation’s previous sets of standards. Addressing these standards in the currently over 40 percent of the nation’s classrooms that have adopted or adapted the NGSS will demand that we prepare new and current teachers, who can effectively address the interdisciplinary nature of climate change and societal responses. To address this opportunity and need a collaboration between NOAA, TERC and CIRES has been established to develop an Educator Framework for Teaching Climate and Energy Literacy for K-12 teachers across the curriculum based on the NRC Framework for K-12 Science Education: Practices, Crosscutting Concepts, and Core Ideas. This collaboration is developing an effective way to frame the use of resources and practices to help teachers address the NGSS using the CLEAN (Climate Literacy and Energy Awareness Network, cleanet.org) and Climate.gov products and models to engage students as citizens of a low-carbon and climate-resilient future. The results of this collaboration will be discussed in the session.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85184", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85185" } }
{"authors":"Karl Karlstrom::University of New Mexico Main Campus--", "title":"EP41A-0915: Cenozoic incision history of the Little Colorado River and its role in carving Grand Canyon", "abstract":"Multi-stage incision/denudation history for the southwestern Colorado Plateau involved: carving of 70-30 Ma Laramide paleotopography controlled by strike valleys at the base of retreating cliffs, 25-15 Ma incision of an East Kaibab paleovalley that cut to about half the modern depth of eastern Grand Canyon, and 5-6 Ma integration of the Colorado River (CR) through Grand Canyon. A synthesis of Little Colorado River (LCR) incision history informs aspects of each episode. Refined evidence for the first two episodes is from new thermochronology modeling that shows post-Laramide NE cliff retreat and a 35-25 Ma LCR paleovalley that flowed NW across the Kaibab uplift. Next was 16-14 Ma playa/ marsh deposition of Lower Bidahochi Formation, 13-8 Ma non-deposition, and 6-8 fluvial upper Bidahochi Formation with base level defined by Hopi Buttes maars. Little denudation in the LCR valley from 16 to 6 Ma is documented by similar elevations of 16 and 6 Ma paleo baselevels. The third pulse of regional incision/denudation was associated with integration of the CR across the Vermillion Cliffs after 5-6 Ma. Earliest integration reoccupied the East Kaibab paleocanyon, inferred from thermochronology to have been at ~1500-1700 m elevation at 15 Ma. Topographically inverted dated basalt mesas in the LCR headwater region show steady incision of 43 m/Ma since 6 Ma. New 2 Ma sanidine ages for Crooked Ridge and Blue Point ash show ~100 m/Ma differential incision across the LCR knickpoint over the last ~ 2 Ma: ~400 m (~200 m/Ma) at the confluence, 400-500 m (200-250 m/Ma) at the projected confluence of Crooked Ridge and the LCR, 220 m (110 m/Ma) for topographically inverted basalt mesas in LCR tributaries in the central reaches, and 116-204 m (61-43 m/Ma) in the headwaters. Headwater uplift of the Rocky Mountains likely facilitated CR integration; post-2 Ma differential incision in the LCR may reflect a combination of regional mantle-driven epeirogenic uplift and additional mantle-driven headwater uplift of the Springerville volcanic field. Acceleration of incision in the last 100 ka is indicated by travertine U-series dating, but this may not have averaged out glacial-interglacial fluctuations. Proposed climate changes (e.g. 5-6 Ma and 2.5 Ma) likely amplified tectonic forcings.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85185", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85186" } }
{"authors":"Michael Pritchard::University of California Irvine--Jian Sun::University of California Irvine--Gabriel Kooperman::University of California Irvine--", "title":"A11N-0270: Effects of cloud superparameterization at the land-atmosphere interface", "abstract":"Problems exist in simulating land-atmosphere coupling in modern GCMs. The effect of including explicit boundary layer dynamics via cloud superparameterization (SP) on land-atmosphere coupling is analyzed in several versions of the SP Community Atmosphere Model (SPCAM). Super-parameterization impacts both the net radiative input to the land-surface and the partitioning of sensible and latent heating with a distinct signature. We separate the effects of atmospheric processes, especially cloud radiative properties, from land-surface processes, especially soil-moisture dynamics, using a series of free-running and hindcast simulations. Effects of SP include reducing the coupling strength in the Central Great Plain in American, and reverses the terrestrial segment coupling sign (from negative to positive) over India. Analysis of the triggering feedback strength (TFS) and amount feedback strength (AFS) shows SP can capture the patterns of these indices over North America, with probability of afternoon precipitation enhanced by high evaporative fraction along the eastern United States and Mexico, while conventional versions of CAM struggle to capture this signal.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85186", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85187" } }
{"authors":"Pawel Misztal::University of California Berkeley--Robert Weber::University of California Berkeley--Abhinav Guha::Bay Area Air Quality Management District--Roger Seco::University of California Irvine--Saewung Kim::University of California Irvine--Alex Guenther::University of California Irvine--Allen Goldstein::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"B43F-0616: Observations of Vertical Gradients in Composition, Oxidation States, and Diurnal Dynamics for a Comprehensive Suite of VOCs from 10 to 525 m in the San Joaquin Valley, California", "abstract":"Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are emitted by numerous anthropogenic and biogenic sources and undergo oxidative processing, as well as horizontal and vertical transport, in the troposphere. Understanding the dynamics of chemical and physical land atmosphere exchange processes and their impacts on atmospheric chemistry requires high temporal resolution of observations at multiple heights and the knowledge of the sources and sinks. We measured dynamic composition changes of VOCs as a function of height (5 inlets from 10 to 525 m, switching every 2 minutes, full profile every 10 minutes) for more than a year using a PTR-QMS. Here, we focus on a multi-week period in February 2013 when simultaneous SRI-TOFMS and PTR-QMS took place. More than 300 ions were detected within an m/z range of 0.000 – 400.000 Th and 260 ions were analyzed. Chemical formulas were assigned to more than 50% of these ions. Late winter is a period when anthropogenic influences are relatively high including remote sources in the Central Valley. Biogenic influences are low at this time of year, but were clearly observed. The average diurnal vertical gradients (Figure 1) showed trends and patterns and behavior consistent with boundary layer dynamics, wind profiles and source activity for a broad array of VOCs and source categories. Mass concentration of oxygenated VOCs with 2, 3 or more oxygens or with nitrogen+oxygen had an increasing tendency with height. The opposite was true for pure hydrocarbons and reduced nitrogen containing VOCs which generally decrease with height. The remaining species comprised halogenated as well as other volatile products. Average oxidation state ranged from -2.0 to 4.3. These observations are useful to reflect the dynamics of VOCs at a rural site in the Central Valley and could be particularly useful for comparison with models of atmospheric chemistry that include PBL dynamics. Figure 1: Gradient concentration diurnal profiles for 48 selected ions, showing the complexity of VOC dynamics. The color maps represent concentration (ppb). The data shown cover the period of February 12 to February 20, 2013.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85187", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85188" } }
{"authors":"Wayne Robarge::North Carolina State University Raleigh--", "title":"B31B-0553: Suppression of Ammonia Volatilization from Urea-Based Fertilizers Using Urease Inhibitors: A Reasonably Available Control Technology for Agriculture?", "abstract":"Ammonia loss from fertilizers can impact formation of atmospheric aerosols, as well as contribute to nitrogen (N) deposition in terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Urea is the predominant form of N fertilizer used worldwide due to its high N content (46.6% N) and low cost. Once in contact with soil or vegetation, urea is hydrolyzed to ammonium via naturally occurring urease enzymes. Losses of N from surface applied urea as ammonia can exceed 30%. To address this issue, various physical and chemical mechanisms have been incorporated into granular urea. The most common approach is incorporation of urease inhibitors such as N-(n-butyl) thiophosphoric triamide (NBPT). We have been investigating ammonia volatilization from urea granules (+/- urease inhibitors) in various field and laboratory controlled experiments for the past several years. Laboratory experiments are conducted with a customized growth chamber system designed to continuously measure ammonia volatilization. Field measurements are conducted using a passive sampler technology with an acid-coated trap in PVC cylinders, or annular denuder technology using flow-through PVC chambers. Daily exchanges of acid-coated denuder tubes enhance the sensitivity of ammonia volatilization measurements for the urease-inhibitor treated product. Loss of N from commercial urea granules has ranged from 6 - ~ 35%, depending on ambient temperature. This loss typically occurs within the first 5-10 days under field conditions. Some urease-inhibitors can minimize loss of N via volatilization (< 5%) for up to 20+ days in the absence of a rainfall event. Visual observations have confirmed that on bare soil, treated or untreated urea granules quickly “dissolve” and move into the soil. The accompanying urease-inhibitor formulation moves with the urea continuing to provide protection against reaction with naturally occurring urease enzymes. Use of urease-inhibitors does not guarantee increased crop yields or NUE, but the consistency of inhibitors incorporating NBPT suggest that these formulations represent a reasonable available control technology for use in agriculture to reduce ammonia emissions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85188", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85189" } }
{"authors":"David Griffith::University of Wollongong--", "title":"A41A-0028: Long Open Path Fourier Transform Spectroscopy Measurements of Greenhouse Gases in the Near Infrared", "abstract":"Atmospheric composition measurements are an important tool to quantify local and regional emissions and sinks of greenhouse gases. Most in situ measurements are made at a point, but how representative are such measurements in an inhomogeneous environment? Open path Fourier Transform Spectroscopy (FTS) measurements potentially offer spatial averaging and continuous measurements of several trace gases (including CO2, CH4, CO and N2O) simultaneously in the same airmass. Spatial averaging over kilometre scales is a better fit to the finest scale atmospheric models becoming available, and helps bridge the gap between models and in situ measurements. In this paper we assess the precision, accuracy and reliability of long open path measurements by Fourier Transform Spectroscopy in the near infrared from a 5-month continuous record of measurements over a 1.5 km pathlength. Direct open-atmosphere measurements of trace gases CO2, CH4, CO and N2O as well as O2 were retrieved from several absorption bands between 4000 and 8000 cm-1 (2.5 – 1.25 micron). At one end of the path an in situ FTIR analyser simultaneously collected well calibrated measurements of the same species for comparison with the open path-integrated measurements. The measurements ran continuously from June – November 2014. We introduce the open path FTS measurement system and present an analysis of the results, including assessment of precision, accuracy relative to co-incident in situ measurements, reliability. Short term precision of the open path measurement of CO2 was better than 1 ppm for 5 minute averages and thus sufficient for studies in urban and other non-background environments. Measurement bias relative to calibrated in situ measurements was stable across the measurement period. The system operated reliably with data losses mainly due to weather events such as rain and fog preventing transmission of the IR beam. In principle the system can be improved to provide longer pathlengths and higher precision, and we present recent progress in improving the original measurements.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85189", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85190" } }
{"authors":"Rebecca Beadling::University of Arizona--Jianjun Yin::University of Arizona--Pepijn Bakker::Oregon State University--Ronald Stouffer::Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory--", "title":"PP43D-2305: Impact of Greenland Ice Sheet Melt on the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation in GFDL ESM2Mb", "abstract":"Observations show an increase in the melting of the Greenland Ice Sheet (GIS) since the early 20th century with a significant acceleration over the past decade. Located next to two critical areas of deep water formation, the GIS has the potential to directly impact the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) via the freshening of surface waters in these regions. All the Earth System Models part of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) project a significant decline in AMOC strength over the next 100 to 200 years under increased greenhouse gas concentrations; however none of these projections consider the impacts of the GIS. Previous modelling studies have investigated the response of AMOC to freshwater input in various hosing experiments, but the magnitude of the change in AMOC strength varies significantly between these studies. The uncertainty is likely a result of the wide range of experimental design, including various methods for imposing the freshwater forcing in the simulations and use of different global climate models which do not simulate realistic melt from the GIS. Here, we present results from experiments in which GFDL ESM2Mb is forced with realistic projections of freshwater discharge from the GIS under the RCP 8.5 scenario in order to investigate the impact of future melt of the GIS on the AMOC. The results presented here are a contribution to the AMOC Model Intercomparison Project (AMOCMIP), a community effort to investigate the impacts of GIS melt on AMOC.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85190", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85191" } }
{"authors":"Margarete Jadamec::University of Houston--Jeffrey Freymueller::University of Alaska Fairbanks--", "title":"T51C-2894: Numerical Models of Alaskan Tectonics: A Review and Looking Ahead to a New Era of Research", "abstract":"The Pacific-North American plate boundary in Alaska is in the current scientific spotlight, as a highlighted tectonic region for integrated scientific investigation. It is timely, therefore, to step back and examine the previous numerical modeling studies of Alaska. Reviewing the numerical models is valuable, as geodynamic modeling can be a predictive tool that can guide and target field studies, both geologic and geophysical. This review presents a comparison of the previous numerical modeling studies of the Alaska-Aleutian subduction zone, including the mainland and extending into northwestern Canada. By distinguishing between the model set-up, governing equations, and underlying assumptions, non-modelers can more easily understand under what context the modeling predictions can be interpreted. Several key features in the Alaska tectonic setting appear in all the models to have a first order effect on the resulting deformation, such as the plate margin geometry and Denali fault. In addition, there are aspects of the tectonic setting that lead to very different results depending how they are implemented into the models. For example, models which fix the slab velocity to surface plate motions predict lower mantle flow rates than models that allow the slab to steepen. Despite the previous modeling studies, many unanswered questions remain, including the formation of the Wrangell volcanics, the driver for motion in western and interior Alaska, and the timing and nature of slab deformation. A synthesis of this kind will be of value to geologists, geodeticists, seismologists, volcanologists, sedimentologists, geochemists, as well as geodynamicists.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85191", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85192" } }
{"authors":"Bruce McGurk::Self Employed--Thomas Painter::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"C33B-0817: Assimilation of Airborne Snow Observatory Snow Water Equivalent to Improve Runoff Forecasting Model Performance and Reservoir Management During Warm and Dry Winters", "abstract":"The Airborne Snow Observatory (ASO) NASA-JPL demonstration mission has collected detailed snow information for portions of the Tuolumne Basin in California for three years, 2013 - 2015. Both 2014 and 2015 were low snow years, and 2015 was exceptionally warm and analogous to future years after climate change. The ASO uses an imaging spectrometer and LiDAR sensors mounted in an aircraft to collect snow depth and extent data, and snow albedo. By combining ground and modeled density fields, the ~weekly flights over the Tuolumne produced both basin-wide and detailed sub-basin snow water equivalent (SWE) estimates that were provided to Hetch Hetchy Reservoir operators. The data were also assimilated into an hydrologic simulation model in an attempt to improve the accuracy and timing of a runoff forecasting tool that can be used to improve the management of Hetch Hetchy Reservoir, the source of 85% of the water supply for 2.6 million people on the San Francisco Peninsula. The USGS Precipitation Runoff Modeling System was calibrated to the 1181 square kilometer basin and simulation results compared to observed runoff with and without assimilation of ASO data. Simulated and observed were also compared with observed with both single updates associated with each flight, and with sequential updates from each flight. Sequential updating was found to improve correlation between observed and simulated reservoir inflows, and there by improve the ability of reservoir operators to more efficiently allocate the last half of the recession limb of snowmelt inflow and be assured of filling the reservoir and minimizing ecologically-damaging late season spills.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85192", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85193" } }
{"authors":"Karen McCurdy::Georgia Southern University--", "title":"PA33B-2187: Science, Technology and Natural Resources Policy: Overcoming Congressional Gridlock", "abstract":"The current status of Science, Technology and Natural Resources (STNR) policy in the United States provides an ideal context to examine the influence of committee seniority within the public policy process. Exemplars of the Policy Entrepreneur have been individuals in leadership positions, whether executive or legislative. The role of junior committee members in shaping policy innovation is less well understood, and is frequently masked either in cross-sectional research designs or in case studies. The House Natural Resources committee seniority patterns are compared to the House of Representatives Chamber data from 1975 to 2015. This expanse of congressional time captures both the policy innovation of the Class of 1974 who helped transform the public lands by pursuing a preservation agenda, along with the contemporaneous gridlock caused by disagreements about reducing the size of the federal government, a policy agenda championed and sustained by the Class of 1994. Several types of political actors have served as policy entrepreneurs, President Kennedy and Secretary of Interior Udall shepherding the Wilderness Act of 1964 from the Executive branch, or in the 111th Congress Committee chairmen Senator Christopher Dodd and Representative Barney Frank, having announced their retirements, spent their final Congress shaping the consensus that produced the Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010. A less studied policy phenomenon relies on “packing the committee” to outvote the leadership. This tactic can be used by the party leadership to overcome recalcitrant senior committee members, as was the case for Democrats in the House Interior and Insular Affairs Committee shift to preservation in the 1970s, or the tactic can be employed from the grassroots, as may be happening in the case of the House Natural Resources Committee in the 114th Congress. A policy making process analog to rivers is more appropriate than a mechanistic model. As there are multiple causes for rivers reaching flood stage, there are multiple pressure points that can be applied to produce policy innovation. The better understood tactics are the orderly, polite activities of a policy monopoly. The more rough and tumble behaviors associated with gridlock may be just as important to understanding when policy innovation is likely to occur.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85193", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85194" } }
{"authors":"Tsilavo Raharimahefa::University of Regina--", "title":"V23B-3117: Geochemical Signatures of Neoproterozoic Granites and Granitoid-gneisses from Angavo Belt, Central Madagascar", "abstract":"The basement rocks of Madagascar record high-grade metamorphism, magmatism, and contractional and extensional structures that accompanied the collision of the eastern and western Gondwana segments of the supercontinent followed by its collapse. In the eastern central Madagascar, granitoids dominate the landscape and occur in a large area near and within the N-S trending highly strained zone known as the Angavo Shear Zone or Angavo belt. The area is a key in understanding the evolution of basement of Madagascar and the reconstruction of the Gondwana supercontinent. These granitoids range from layered to massive and previously published U-Pb zircon dating yielded three distinctive Neoproterozoic magmatisms at 770 Ma to 820 Ma, ca. 660Ma, and ca 550Ma. However, it was unknown whether these ages represent distinct magmatic pulses or reflect a continuous granitoid emplacement. This work contributes to the knowledge of the Malagasy basement rocks and to explore and discuss the origin and petrotectonic evolution of the granites and granitoid-gneisses from this part of the Madagascar. The rock samples are placed into three groups: group A and B for granitoid-gneisses and a third group for the granite layers. Group A and B are metaluminous and slightly peraluminous, respectively. All rocks have typical subduction zone calc-alkaline signatures. Group A is characterized by enrichment in large ion lithophile elements (LILE) but low U, LREE enrichment, depletion in the high field strength elements (HFSE). In contrast, Group B has REE patterns closely similar to Archean sediments. The granite layers show fractionated REE patterns in which HREE patterns show strong correlation with Zr abundances. Trends in major element variation diagrams and the enrichment of incompatible elements could be explained by simple fractional crystallization, while the overall geochemical signatures reflect either (1) melting of ancient crust or (2) crustal contamination of a more evolved magmas that are produced by differentiation of mantle-derived magma. Geochemical signatures of studied rocks reveal the contribution of old continental crust and the role of continental arc magmatism in the genesis of both granites and granitoid-gneisses of eastern central Madagascar.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85194", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85195" } }
{"authors":"Danielle Touma::Stanford University--Noah Diffenbaugh::Stanford University--", "title":"GC43A-1178: Observed Changes in Extreme Precipitation Events over the US", "abstract":"We analyze changes in extreme daily precipitation over the conterminous US using observational (CPC unified daily gauge, ~25km grid size), reanalysis (NARR, 32km grid size) and dynamically downscaled (WRF, 4km grid size) data spanning up to 65 years in the recent past. First, we present the changes in the characteristics of extreme precipitation (95th percentile of rain-days) over six regions in the reanalysis dataset on daily, monthly and annual time scales. Our analysis shows that the spatial extent of extreme precipitation events, defined as the area of contiguous grid points of daily extreme precipitation, has been decreasing by up to 5-fold over most regions since 1979. We investigate the thermodynamic and dynamic causes of this decreasing trend in the spatial extent. Additionally, we assess if a static separation of “local” and “remote” regions is valid for the analysis of moisture fluxes feeding an extreme precipitation event given the varying spatial extents over time. Moreover, we analyze the relatively finer resolutions of observed and dynamically downscaled datasets to allow us to further understand the physical causes driving changes in extreme events. This is achieved by identifying smaller spatial extents of extreme precipitation events in these datasets and quantifying their associated finer-scale moisture dynamics. Overall, this study allows us to understand the changes in extreme precipitation characteristics in the observed past and how changing moisture dynamics have shaped these characteristics.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85195", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85196" } }
{"authors":"Ahmed Lachhab::Susquehanna University--", "title":"NS43B-1980: Electrical Resistivity, Seismic Refraction Tomography and Drilling Logs to Identify the Heterogeneity and the Preferential Flow in a Shallow Aquifer", "abstract":"The study site is located at the Center for Environmental Education and Research (CEER) at Susquehanna University. Electrical Resistivity and Seismic Refraction Tomography (ERT and SRT), as well as several pumping tests were performed to identify zones of heterogeneities and hydrogeophysical characteristics of a shallow unconfined aquifer. The combination of these methods was selected to study the local geology and the subsurface preferential pathways of groundwater flow. 22 Dipole-Dipole ERT transects with 56 electrodes each and 11 SRT transects with 24 geophones each were performed. Drilling logs of 5 observation wells located within the site were also used. All drilling logs showed clearly the heterogeneity of the aquifer when compared to each other. The combination of ERT and SRT indicated that a potential zone of preferential flow is present within the aquifer and can be accurately identified based on the approach adopted in this study. The drilling logs served to specifically identify the soil and the geological formations making the heterogeneity of the aquifer. 3D ERT and SRT block diagrams were generated to connect all formations shown in the 2D tomography profiles to visualize the pathways of preferential flow and non-conductive formations. While ERT has proven to show saturated areas of the subsurface, SRT was more effective in identifying the bedrock-soil discontinuity and other near surface formations contributing to the local heterogeneity.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85196", "section":"Near Surface Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85197" } }
{"authors":"Kelly Redmond::Desert Research Institute Reno--", "title":"A Perspective on the PACE Post-doctoral Fellow Program", "abstract":"During the 30th Annual Climate Diagnostics and Prediction Workshop at State College PA in 2005, Lisa Goddard originated an idea that after further development became the Post-docs Applying Climate Expertise (PACE) Program. The developmental process was considerably enhanced by participation on US CLIVAR committees; CLIVAR embraces a wide spectrum from basic understanding of how climate operates to the application of that understanding for human and environmental benefit. The basic structure and application process for PACE are described in other talks in this session. The program is currently supported by NOAA but the model is potentially applicable to a wide range of agencies. A key concept is the stipulation of deliberate co-production of knowledge and cross-culture fertilization, making this program especially attractive for agencies and groups operating in a public arena. The approach taken is more difficult to implement because of the two-stage process. The oversight committee, which includes recent participants, continues to tinker with ways to streamline and improve the rather unusual and more lengthy application process, which is considerably more complex than most post-doc applications. One issue that remains to be better resolved is what is meant by the term “climate expert,” a phrase that means different things to different people in the climate community itself, including the level of breadth and depth of a complicated subject like climate. The “graduates” of this program have considered PACE to be a positive and very worthwhile experience in terms of broadening their professional portfolio and conceptualization of the use of information from climate science and allied disciplines. The counterpart decision-making institutions have likewise been very supportive of the program and its outcomes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85197", "section":""} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85199" } }
{"authors":"Tiffany Gatesman::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Thomas Douglas::US Army Corps of Engineers--Anna Liljedahl::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Tom Trainor::University of Alaska Fairbanks - UAF--", "title":"C33E-0876: Hydrograph separation of a sub-arctic glacial watershed, Interior Alaska", "abstract":"Glacier melt affect several Alaska rivers and thus far, the contribution to larger-scale watershed runoff has attracted limited attention, and in particular, a quantitative assessment. Geochemically-based hydrograph separation techniques in combination with glacier mass balance and runoff measurements can help refine our understanding of the contributing sources and therefore, support the refinement of both short-term flood forecasts and long-term runoff projections. Our study was designed to quantify the contribution of glacier melt, snow melt and rainfall to lowland streamflow of a sub-arctic basin and to assess hydrologic pathways of glacier wastage. Jarvis Creek watershed (634 km2), Interior Alaska, drains the north-facing Eastern Alaska Range, starting at the Jarvis Glacier (6.7 km2) and flows 69 km to its outlet in the Delta River, Delta Junction. Glacial contribution accounts for at least 15% of total runoff as estimated from measured glacier melt and lowland runoff. Daily stable water isotope samples near the Jarvis Creek outlet show distinct chemical signatures in contributing sources and large seasonal and interannual δ18O variability. For example, geochemical measurements from 2011 show low rainfall contribution into Jarvis Creek, whereas 2014 show high input of rainfall; and, unlike 2014, spring 2013 show a strong snowmelt contribution in late spring. Stable water isotopes will be the primary signature to inform our end-member volumetric mixing modeling efforts, while dissolved ion concentrations will support a differentiation between glacier- and groundwater sources. Ultimately, the combination of glacier mass balance, hydrological and geochemical measurements will allow us to gain a fundamental knowledge about the current regional hydrologic system.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85199", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85201" } }
{"authors":"V.Y. Chow::Harvard University--Archana Dayalu::Harvard University--Steven Wofsy::Harvard University--Christoph Gerbig::Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry--", "title":"B52B-04: Comparing a Carbon Budget for the Amazon Basin Derived from Aircraft Observations", "abstract":"We present and compare a carbon budget for the Brazilian Amazon Basin based on the Balanço Atmosférico Regional de Carbono na Amazônia (BARCA) aircraft program, which occurred in November 2008 & May 2009, to other published carbon budgets. In particular, we compare our budget and analysis to others also derived from aircraft observations. Using mesoscale meteorological fields from ECMWF and WRF, we drive the Stochastic Time-Inverted Lagrangian Transport (STILT) model and couple the footprint, or influence, to a biosphere model represented by the Vegetation Photosynthesis Respiration Model (VPRM). Since it is the main driver for the VPRM, we use observed shortwave radiation from towers in Brazil and French Guyana to examine the modeled shortwave radiation data from GL 1.2 (a global radiation model based on GOES 8 visible imagery), ECMWF, and WRF to determine if there are any biases in the modeled shortwave radiation output. We use WRF-STILT and ECMWF-STILT, GL 1.2 shortwave radiation, temperature, and vegetation maps (IGBP and SYNMAP) updated by landuse scenarios modeled by Sim Amazonia 2 and Sim Brazil, to compute hourly a priori CO2 fluxes by calculating Gross Ecosystem Exchange and Respiration for the 4 significant vegetation types across two (wet and dry) seasons as defined by 10-years of averaged TRIMM precipitation data. SF6 from stations and aircraft observations are used to determine the anthropogenic CO2 background and the lateral boundary conditions are taken from CarbonTracker2013B. The BARCA aircraft mixing ratios are then used as a top down constraint in an inversion framework that solves for the parameters controlling the fluxes for each vegetation type. The inversion provides scaling factors for GEE and R for each vegetation type in each season. From there, we derive a budget for the Basin and compare/contrast with other published basinwide CO2 fluxes. ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85201", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85202" } }
{"authors":"Robbie Hember::Natural Resources Canada--Werner Kurz::Canadian Forest Service--Nicholas Coops::University of British Columbia--", "title":"GC31G-03: Empirical Constraints on Water Stress-induced Tree Mortality and its Impacts on Forest Biomass Dynamics in Western North America", "abstract":"It is widely appreciated that forest biomass dynamics do not follow smooth sigmoidal age response functions, yet accounting for realistic overshoot-and-collapse cycles remains a big challenge. Here, millions of observations of vital status at permanent sample plots from Canada and the U.S. were used to predict probability of tree mortality (Pm) based on segmented logistic regression functions of xylem water potential (WPX) derived from a simplified model of plant water transport for dominant boreal and temperate North American tree species. First, we demonstrate that hydraulic limits are clearly detectable from the increase of Pm at the lowest levels of WPX and that the relationship is strongly defined by increasing vulnerability (decreasing WPX) as tree height (h) increases. Second, we demonstrate the implications of representing water stress-induced mortality on regional simulations of net ecosystem biomass production (NEBP), drawing on examples of specific collapse events where we have observations of NEBP for comparison. Simulations suggest that extreme surface energy balance anomalies during 1981 and 1998 triggered catastrophic levels of mortality in regions of western North America. Yet, simulations may still greatly underestimate the impact of these collapse events if associations exist between WPX and insect outbreaks. Nevertheless, the models suggest that a combination of size-dependent hydraulic limits and low-frequency variability in the surface energy balance conspire to produce overshoot-and-collapse cycles that strongly shaped biomass dynamics in western North America over recent decades.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85202", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85204" } }
{"authors":"An-Min Wu::University of Minnesota - Twin Cities--Edward Nater::University of Minnesota - Twin Cities--Charles Perry::USDA Forest Service Northern Research Station--Brent Dalzell::University of Minnesota - Twin Cities--Barry Wilson::USDA Forest Service Northern Research Station--", "title":"B43I-0677: Identifying Minimum Detectable Change in US Forest Soil Carbon under the Forest Inventory Analysis (FIA) Sampling Strategy", "abstract":"Estimates of carbon stocks and stock changes in the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service's Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) Program are reported as the official United States submission to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. Soil, as a critical component of the forest carbon stocks, has been sampled in about 10-year intervals in FIA with the re-measurement underway. However, the magnitude of detectable change in soil organic carbon (SOC) with the current sampling scheme is unknown. We aim to identify SOC variability and to best determine minimum detectable changes in SOC under the current sampling scheme. The project seeks to: identify statistical relationships between SOC and environmental covariates; normalize SOC data for main forest-type groups (FTGs) using identified covariates; and determine the minimum detectable change in the normalized SOC using power analysis. We investigated SOC variability for 8 FTGs: Oak-Hickory, Maple-Beech-Birch, Pinyon-Juniper, Loblolly-Shortleaf Pine, Aspen-Birch, Douglas-Fir, Fir-Spruce-Mountain Hemlock and Woodland Hardwoods. Relationships between SOC and environmental covariates (biomass/soil properties in FIA, PRISM climate data, and DEM-derived terrain attributes) are determined by multiple linear regression and are used to normalize SOC variability. The results showed that terrain attributes were not significant in explaining SOC in the FIA dataset and climate data were only significant in certain FTGs locations. Except for Oak-Hickory, Maple-Beech-Birch and Pinyon-Juniper groups, sample numbers are insufficient to detect a change in SOC less than 10 percent (%) of the mean. To guide future sampling efforts, we will continue our study on detecting minimal change in SOC and to explore sample number and sampling frequency scenarios to inform future soil sampling protocols.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85204", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85205" } }
{"authors":"Nathan Leisso::NEON--", "title":"GC33D-1321: Calibration and Validation of the National Ecological Observatory Network’s Airborne Imaging Spectrometers", "abstract":"The National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) is being constructed by the National Science Foundation and is slated for completion in 2017. NEON is designed to collect data to improve the understanding of changes in observed ecosystems. The observatory will produce data products on a variety of spatial and temporal scales collected from individual sites strategically located across the U.S. including Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. Data sources include standardized terrestrial, instrumental, and aquatic observation systems in addition to three airborne remote sensing observation systems installed into leased Twin Otter aircraft. The Airborne Observation Platforms (AOP) are designed to collect 3-band aerial imagery, waveform and discrete LiDAR, and high-fidelity imaging spectroscopy data over the NEON sites annually at or near peak-greenness. The NEON Imaging Spectrometer (NIS) is a Visible and Shortwave Infrared (VSWIR) sensor designed by NASA JPL for ecological applications. Spectroscopic data is collected at 5-nm intervals across the solar-reflective spectral region (380-nm to 2500-nm) in a 34-degree FOV swath. A key uncertainty driver to the derived remote sensing NEON data products is the calibration of the imaging spectrometers. In addition, the calibration and accuracy of the higher-level data product algorithms is essential to the overall NEON mission to detect changes in the collected ecosystems over the 30-year expected lifetime. The typical calibration workflow of the NIS consists of the characterizing the focal plane, spectral calibration, and radiometric calibration. Laboratory spectral calibration is based on well-defined emission lines in conjunction with a scanning monochromator to define the individual spectral response functions. The radiometric calibration is NIST traceable and transferred to the NIS with an integrating sphere calibrated through the use of transfer radiometers. The laboratory calibration is monitored and maintained through the use of an On-Board Calibration (OBC) system. Recent advances in the understanding of the NIS sensor that have led to improvements in the overall calibration accuracy are reported. In addition, the NIS calibration and data products are compared to Earth-observing satellite sensors.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85205", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85206" } }
{"authors":"Alejandro Martínez::Universidad Nacional de Colombia--Andres Ochoa::Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Medellín, Colombia--", "title":"B53D-0608: Holdridge life zone physical inconsistency", "abstract":"Life zones is a very used classification system, developed by L.R. Holdridge in 1967, used to discern why plants have different adaptation mechanism to their surrounding environment. In this paper, the relation between potential evapotranspiration rate (ETr ), anual precipitation (P ) and biotemperature (Tb ) in the Holdridge triangle, is parametrized (P = (500/9)*ETr) to evaluate if the rain process is conserved in Colombia. Further, an adiabatic ascent of air with diurnal and interannual variability, and cluster analysis is view as a classification example of the advantage of using physical process to evaluate the plants adaptation mechanisms . The most inconsistency life zones are situated in the rainiest places of Colombian pacific costs in tropical latitudinal region, are non-exist places in holdridge triangle with annual biotemperature higher than 26◦ C, annual precipitation about 10.000mm and annual potential evapotranspiration rate about 0.1. The difference between Holdridge predicted precipitation and the precipitation measured with TRMM are about 5.000mm in these places. Classification systems based on an annual average, do not stablish adaptation as a function of diurnal variability, for example, the difference between valley sides vegetation could not being determined. This kind of limitations, added to a validation procces and the auscence of a physic procces in the variable interaction, make the Holdridge Life Zones a very useful tool, but physically inconsistent for caracterice vegetation as a function of precipitation. The rain process is very complex, depend of mass and energy exchanges and is still a controversial topic in atmospheric modeling, as a biotic pump.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85206", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85207" } }
{"authors":"Daniel Parsons::University of Hull--Eric Prokocki::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Jim Best::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Philip Ashworth::University of Brighton--Chris Simpson::Fulcrum Graphic Communications Inc.--Scott Constantine::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--", "title":"EP31C-1024: Characterizing the differences in bankfull channel geometry across the tidal-fluvial zone of micro- to macro- tidal fluvial systems: Lower Trinity River, TX, USA vs Chehalis River, WA, USA", "abstract":"Bankfull channel width measurements and bankfull stage-discharge relationships, coupled with published and/or collected channel depth sounding readings, were utilized to examine bankfull channel geometries (in the single-thread meandering channel reaches only) spanning from the fluvial ‘normal flow’ moving downstream through the tidal-fluvial ‘backwater’ hydraulic regime of two rivers that are micro- (lower Trinity River) and macro- tidally influenced (Chehalis River). This analysis reveals that moving downstream from the fully-fluvial ‘normal flow’ regime through to the tidal-fluvial ‘backwater’ regime, the micro-tidal lower Trinity River displays: (a) a decrease in bankfull channel width and an increase in bankfull channel depth, (b) a decrease in bankfull channel width/depth ratio, (c) a bankfull channel cross-sectional area that remains nearly constant, and (d) both measured and calculated bankfull discharge remains constant at approximately 900 m3sec-1. Conversely, the macro-tidal lower Chehalis River displays: (a) an increase in both bankfull channel width and depth, (b) bankfull channel width/depth ratios that remain constant, (c) a bankfull channel cross-sectional area that increases significantly, and (d) both measured and/or calculated bankfull discharge values range from approximately 800 (normal flow) to 10,000 m3sec-1 (downstream end of backwater regime). Importantly, along the Chehalis River a maximum of ~ 2,000 m3sec-1 of the total bankfull water discharge (10,000 m3sec-1), at the downstream end of the ‘backwater flow’ regime, can be accounted for by the Chehalis River proper and two tributary inputs. This suggests, at this channel cross-sectional location, that the additional 8,000 m3sec-1 of total bankfull water discharge must be supplied by the downstream tidally-sourced component of total water discharge. These results, coupled with the rates of change of measured and/or computed metrics from above, will be utilized to provide insight into the fluvial vs tidal dominance of ancient geologic deposits, such as the Cretaceous McMurray Formation, Alberta, Canada.              ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85207", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85208" } }
{"authors":"Troy Magney::University of Idaho NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Lee Vierling::University of Idaho--Jan Eitel::University of Idaho--Heather Greaves::University of Idaho--", "title":"B21D-0488: Hyper-temporal LiDAR for tracking fine-scale changes in vegetation structure, phenology, and physiology", "abstract":"Vegetation three-dimensional (3-D) structure is inherently dynamic - plants alter both the allocation of resources within the canopy and branch/shoot morphology at short time-steps to acclimate to local environmental conditions and maximize photosynthetic potential. However, 3-D structure is often ignored in ecological studies because it is difficult to characterize using traditional field methods. Terrestrial laser scanning (TLS) is a rapidly maturing technique to complement and enhance traditional field methods for quantifying 3-D geometric properties of ecosystems. Two major limitations of TLS include the low temporal resolution that often exists between each data acquisition, and the relatively high cost of such systems (entry level systems cost >$40,000 USD) that puts this method out of reach for many potential users. Consequently, TLS is currently limited as a mainstream method for capturing 3-D geometric ecosystem dynamics. Over the last several years, we have been developing a field-ready autonomously operating terrestrial laser scanner (ATLS) capable of monitoring fine-scale changes in vegetation structure on a daily time-step. We will present an overview of recent findings using the ATLS to track changes in vegetation structure in low-stature ecosystems – from cropping system dynamics to Arctic tundra phenology. Further, we will discuss the potential for laser intensity return information from both an ATLS and TLS to track changes in plant phenology and physiology (Chlorophyll content, photoprotective mechanisms, moisture) that occur simultaneously – or prior to – changes in vegetation structure. Our results suggest that fine-scale mapping of plant structure, phenology, and physiology using information from TLS and ATLS could provide new insights into vegetation dynamics in space and time.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85208", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85209" } }
{"authors":"Chunxiang Wang::Niigata University--Hiroshi Fukuoka::Niigata University--", "title":"NH41C-1849: Swarm slide - debris flow disaster induced by extreme rainfall in Hiroshima, August 2014 and lessons learnt in urban designing", "abstract":"Hiroshima city was hit by swarm debris flows along a narrow, and linear-shaped rain band of 2 km x 10 km which appeared in the early morning of August 20, 2014. Most of the flows were induced by shallow slide in the upstream. This disaster claimed 74 death, although this city experienced very similar disaster in 1999, claiming more than 30 residents lives. In the most severely affected debris flow torrent, more than 50 residents were killed. Most of the casualties arose in the wooden, vulnerable houses constructed in front of the exit of torrents. Points and lessons learnt from the disaster are as follows: 1. Authors collected two types of sands from the source scar of the initial debris slides which induced debris flows. Tested by the ring shear apparatus under pore-pressure control condition, clear ` Sliding surface liquefaction`  was confirmed for both samples even under small normal stress, representing the small thickness of the slides. These results shows even instant excess pore pressure could initiate the slides and trigger slide-induced debris flow by undrained loading onto the torrent deposits. 2. Apparently long-term land-use change since 1945 affected and raised the vulnerability of the community. Residential area had expanded into hill-slope (mountainous / semi-mountainous area) especially along the torrents. Those communities were developed on the past debris flow fan. 3. As the devastated area is very close to downtown of Hiroshima city, it gave large societal impact to the Japanese citizens. After 1999 Hiroshima debris flow disaster, the Landslide disaster reduction law which intends to promote designation of landslide potential risk zones, was adopted in 2000. Immediately after 2014 disaster, national diet approved revision of the bill to promote rapid completion of the designation over the national territory. MLIT (Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Tranportation and Tourism) decided to install X-band rain radars at more sites to cover whole city zones of the country. However, narrow extreme rain bands or spots which can not be detected effectively, often appear these years. It means more rain gauges conncted to the net should be implemented at upstreams of the communities facing torrent exits and on debris fan.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85209", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85210" } }
{"authors":"Zhao Chen::Scripps Institution of Oceanography--Peter Gerstoft::University of California San Diego--Peter Bromirski::University of California San Diego--", "title":"S41B-2761: Microseism Directivity from Noise Cross-correlation", "abstract":"The direction of microseisms (0.05-0.35 Hz) is determined from noise cross-correlation with conventional pre-processing, where only earthquakes and local cultural transients (e.g. trawling, fish hitting) are removed. Noise cross-correlation has been successfully used to obtain accurate travel times, generally by retaining the phase (but not the amplitude) using one-bit or running-absolute-mean pre-processing. These methods give cross-correlation functions with modified amplitudes, and tend to accentuate long duration signals, thereby biasing the dominant source direction. Here, to avoid introducing bias, the microseism source direction in the Cascadia region was determined from cross-correlation functions for OBS data using conventional pre-processing. No significantly dominant (in the sense of total energy) microseism source directions are detected. Moreover, pelagic-generated signals tend to be weaker but have longer duration, in contrast to coastally-generated signals that tend to be stronger but have shorter duration.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85210", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85211" } }
{"authors":"James Thorne::University of California Davis--Jacquelyn Bjorkman::University of California Davis--Ryan Boynton::University of California Davis--Joseph Stewart::University of California Davis--Andrew Holguin::University of California Davis--Mark Schwartz::University of California Davis--Whitney Albright::California State Government--", "title":"GC11C-1049: Assessing climate refugia from a terrestrial vegetation vulnerability assessment for 29 types in California.", "abstract":"We assessed the climate vulnerability of 29 terrestrial macrogroup vegetation types in the National Vegetation Classification Scheme covering 99% of California. Using a 2015 landcover map, we defined current and future climate exposure of each type by assessing conditions at all known locations. This approach identifies both areas of expected high stress and of climate refugia. Species distribution models of the vegetation types proved to over-predict the extent of occupied lands, compared to their mapped extents. Trait based components of the vulnerability assessment were far less influential on level of vulnerability than climate projection. Various cutoffs can be selected to describe refugia. Here we classed refugia as the 20% of climate conditions most frequently occupied by a type. Under CNRM CM5 RCP 4.5, of 70,143 km2 that are the most climate-insulated locations, 46,420 km2 move to higher levels of climate exposure. At the other extreme of climate projections tested, MIROC ESM RCP 8.5, 59,137 km2 are lost. Four macrogroups lose their refugia under CNRM 4.5: Pacific Northwest Conifer Forests, Mountain Riparian Scrub and Wet Meadow, Salt Marsh, and Great Basin Upland Scrub. Under MIROC 8.5 and additional 8 macrogroups lose the most commonly experienced climate: Subalpine Aspen Forests & Pine Woodlands, Non-Native Forest and Woodlands, North Coast Deciduous Scrub and Terrace Prairie, Coastal Dune and Bluff Scrub, Freshwater Marsh, Wet Mountain Meadow, Big Sagebrush Scrub, and Alpine Vegetation. These results raise interesting questions regarding the definition of refugia. We review the results and ask how appropriate they are for different ecosystem types.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85211", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85212" } }
{"authors":"Kaveh Zamani::University of California Davis--Fabian Bombardelli::University of California Davis--William Fleenor::University of California Davis--James Courtney::Humboldt State University--", "title":"H41B-1302: VAVUQ, Python and Matlab freeware for Verification and Validation, Uncertainty Quantification", "abstract":"A package of scripts is presented for automated Verification and Validation (V&V) and Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) for engineering codes that approximate Partial Differential Equations (PDFs). The code post-processes model results to produce V&V and UQ information. This information can be used to assess model performance. Automated information on code performance can allow for a systematic methodology to assess the quality of model approximations. The software implements common and accepted code verification schemes. The software uses the Method of Manufactured Solutions (MMS), the Method of Exact Solution (MES), Cross-Code Verification, and Richardson Extrapolation (RE) for solution (calculation) verification. It also includes common statistical measures that can be used for model skill assessment. Complete RE can be conducted for complex geometries by implementing high-order non-oscillating numerical interpolation schemes within the software. Model approximation uncertainty is quantified by calculating lower and upper bounds of numerical error from the RE results. The software is also able to calculate the Grid Convergence Index (GCI), and to handle adaptive meshes and models that implement mixed order schemes. Four examples are provided to demonstrate the use of the software for code and solution verification, model validation and uncertainty quantification. The software is used for code verification of a mixed-order compact difference heat transport solver; the solution verification of a 2D shallow-water-wave solver for tidal flow modeling in estuaries; the model validation of a two-phase flow computation in a hydraulic jump compared to experimental data; and numerical uncertainty quantification for 3D CFD modeling of the flow patterns in a Gust erosion chamber.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85212", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85213" } }
{"authors":"Cristina Castanha::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Biao Zhu::Peking University--Caitlin Hicks Pries::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Margaret Torn::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--", "title":"B43L-03: Soil Warming and Rhizosphere Effects on Root Litter Decomposition at Two Depths in a Mediterranean Grassland Ecosystem", "abstract":"Accurate understanding of soil processes is critical for predicting climate-ecosystem feedbacks. We investigated the effects of soil warming and plant rhizosphere on decomposition of 13C-labeled roots buried at two soil depths at the field lysimeter facilities at Hopland Research and Extension Center, CA. The lysimeters contain soil columns 38-cm in diameter and 48-cm deep (0-15 cm A-horizon and 15-48 cm B-horizon, Laughlin soil) sown with an annual grassland mix. The experimental design includes three treatments: heated, ambient, and unplanted. In February 2014 we added 13C-labeled Avena fatua roots to either 8-12 cm or 38-42 cm. We measured loss of 13C in CO2 from the soil surface and in leachate as dissolved organic carbon (DOC) over two growing seasons. At the end of each growing season we recovered the 13C remaining in the soil. In addition, we monitored plant productivity and soil temperature and moisture. The rates of both soil respiration and DOC losses were greatest in heated and least in unplanted plots, although respiration losses far outweighed leachate losses. Treatment affected timing of decomposition; added root litter was respired earlier in the ambient plots and later in the unplanted plots in both years. The litter addition stimulated native soil respiration in year 1 heated plots. The depth of the litter addition did not have an effect on soil respiration. However, after the first growing season, less added root litter remained in the A than in the B horizon (both in the visible root fraction and in the 2mm soil fraction), indicating lower overall decomposition rates at depth. These results, including 13C recovery following the 2nd growing season and soil microclimate variables, will be used to develop a mechanistic understanding of the impacts of soil warming, the rhizosphere, and soil depth on root decomposition and soil organic matter dynamics, and should improve our predictions of the feedbacks between climate change and carbon cycling throughout the soil profile.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85213", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85214" } }
{"authors":"Manuel Florez::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--Chunquan Yu::MIT--Piero Poli::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--German Prieto::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--", "title":"S42B-03: Using Depth Phases and Array Processing to Characterize Intermediate-depth and Deep Earthquake Clusters", "abstract":"The mechanism for intermediate depth and deep earthquakes is still under debate. The temperatures and pressures are above the point where ordinary fracture ought to occur. Key to constraining this mechanism using seismological data is the precise determination of hypocentral depth and the robust estimation of source parameters. It is well known that depth phases can provide unique information, which not only allows for significant improvement in event depth determination, but also holds the key to better constraining source properties. Nevertheless, routinely and systematically picking such phases at teleseismic or regional distances is problematic due to poor signal-to-noise ratios around the pP and sP phases. To overcome this limitation we have started taking advantage of the availability of dense seismic arrays. We recently proposed a relative earthquake relocation algorithm based on the precise picking of the P and pP phase arrivals using array processing techniques. We further improve our algorithm by implementing source deconvolution to enhance the signal to noise-ratio of the pP phase, which significantly reduces the uncertainty in our estimate of pP-P arrival times. We are thus able to precisely map intermediate-depth and deep seismicity in regions where it is tightly clustered. As a byproduct of our relocation scheme we get array-based estimates of the source time function for every event-pair in the cluster. We explore the Bucaramanga nest in northern South America, arguably the densest and most active intermediate-depth earthquake nest in the world, and provide evidence for at least two clusters within the nest separated by a depth of no more than 5 km. We also map subduction zone earthquake clusters in Chile and Argentina (depth>100Km) and perform relative measurements of source parameters in an attempt to model the diversity of their source processes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85214", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85216" } }
{"authors":"Eric Donovan::University of Calgary--Yukitoshi Nishimura::University of California Los Angeles--Emma Spanswick::University of Calgary--Larry Kepko::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--", "title":"SM32B-07: Substorm Onset: Getting the Sequence of Events Right", "abstract":"New observations from THEMIS and complementary ground-based auroral observing programs have transformed our understanding of substorm onset. As far as we have come, however, there are still great challenges that must be addressed. Determining the relative timing of the different events which comprise onset is perhaps key amongst these, but has proven to be particularly challenging. Here we use optical observations of the onset in white light (THEMIS-ASI) and the 630 nm “redline” (TREx/REGO) to explore the causal relationship between events preceding onset (seen indirectly via auroral streamers) and onset (seen via auroral brightening). To do this, we employ a new analysis technique, called the ‘circogram’, which focuses on the direction of propagation of information in sequences of auroral images.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85216", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85217" } }
{"authors":"Andrew Jones::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Haewon McJeon::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Matteo Muratori::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Wenjong Shi::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--", "title":"GC33A-1271: Feasibility and Costs of Natural Gas as a Bridge to Deep Decarbonization in the United States", "abstract":"Achieving emissions reductions consistent with a 2 degree Celsius global warming target requires nearly complete replacement of traditional fossil fuel combustion with near-zero carbon energy technologies in the United States by 2050. There are multiple technological change pathways consistent with this deep decarbonization, including strategies that rely on renewable energy, nuclear, and carbon capture and storage (CCS) technologies. The replacement of coal-fired power plants with natural gas-fired power plants has also been suggested as a bridge strategy to achieve near-term emissions reduction targets. These gas plants, however, would need to be replaced by near-zero energy technologies or retrofitted with CCS by 2050 in order to achieve longer-term targets. Here we examine the costs and feasibility of a natural gas bridge strategy. Using the Global Change Assessment (GCAM) model, we develop multiple scenarios that each meet the recent US Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) to reduce GHG emissions by 26%-28% below its 2005 levels in 2025, as well as a deep decarbonization target of 80% emissions reductions below 1990 levels by 2050. We find that the gas bridge strategy requires that gas plants be retired on average 20 years earlier than their designed lifetime of 45 years, a potentially challenging outcome to achieve from a policy perspective. Using a more idealized model, we examine the net energy system costs of this gas bridge strategy compared to one in which near-zero energy technologies are deployed in the near tem. We explore the sensitivity of these cost results to four factors: the discount rate applied to future costs, the length (or start year) of the gas bridge, the relative capital cost of natural gas vs. near-zero energy technology, and the fuel price of natural gas. The discount rate and cost factors are found to be more important than the length of the bridge. However, we find an important interaction as well. At low discount rates, the gas bridge is more expensive and a shorter bridge is preferred. At high discount rates, the gas bridge is less expensive and a longer bridge is preferred. This result indicates that the valuation of future expenditures relative to present day expenditures is a major factor in determining the merits of a gas bridge strategy.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85217", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85218" } }
{"authors":"Michael Pritchard::University of California Irvine--Da Yang::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"A33R-06: Resilience of an explicitly simulated Madden-Julian Oscillation to extreme basic state variation challenges moisture mode view", "abstract":"Idealized experiments are performed with the SuperParamaterized CAM to test two hypotheses motivated by a modern view of the “moisture mode” theory of the Madden Julian Oscillation. Inconsistent with both hypotheses, evidence is found of a cold-MJO signal under horizontally homogenous SSTs. Apparently the intrinsic MJO signal in SPCAM3 is a surprisingly resilient mode that can survive both extreme cooling of the climate and a reversal of near-equatorial meridional MSE gradients. Column MSE analysis indicates a negative overall growth rate of MJO MSE in our coldest simulations, which is hard to reconcile with the survival of a cold MJO from a moisture mode view. A resilience of familiar features of the MJO-MSE budget in our simulations could indicate some other cause, beyond local column MSE dynamics, requires such phase relationships to exist.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85218", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85219" } }
{"authors":"Meghan Guild::Arizona State University--Christy Till::Arizona State University--Richard Hervig::Arizona State University--Simon Wallis::Nagoya University--", "title":"V43A-3096: Boron Isotopic Compositions of High-Pressure Hydrous Phases from the Slab-Mantle Wedge Interface", "abstract":"The breakdown or formation of high-pressure hydrous minerals are known to play an important role in the transfer of volatiles and fluid mobile elements from the subducted lithosphere to the mantle wedge in subduction zones, as well as in arc magma genesis. Hydrous mineral formation (e.g. chlorite and serpentine) at P, T conditions corresponding to the slab-mantle wedge interface is observed in experimental studies but has not yet been verified in natural high pressure orogenic peridotites, as there are few definitive tools to distinguish prograde hydrous mineral formation from those formed during exhumation, aside from petrographic textural studies. Here we investigate the boron isotopic composition of hydrous minerals in mafic-ultramafic lithologies both found in an exhumed slab-wedge interface, the Higashi-Akaishi peridotite body of the Sanbagawa metamorphic belt in southwest Japan. The quartz eclogite records peak metamorphic conditions of 2.3-2.4 GPa, 675-740 ºC (Miyamoto et al., 2007), whereas the garnet clinopyroxenite records higher peak conditions of 2.9-3.8 GPa and 700-810ºC, prior to rapid exhumation (Enami et al., 2004). Secondary ion mass spectrometry of paragonite inclusions in garnet porphyroblasts identified in the quartz eclogite yielded δ11B values of ~+5‰ with B concentrations of ~35 ppm. Chlorite is found in textural equilibrium with the anhydrous phases in the garnet clinopyroxenite and records very light B isotopic values (-21.5 ± 4.1‰) and relatively low B concentrations (~3 ppm). Our petrographic and boron isotopic observations in chlorite are consistent with its formation at relatively higher pressures than paragonite. Differences in protolith compositions are likely responsible for differences in B concentrations. Enami et al., J. Metamorphic Geol., 22, 1-15 (2004). Miyamoto et al., J. of Min. and Petro. Sci., 102, 352-367 (2007)", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85219", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85220" } }
{"authors":"Heather Ford::Yale University--Maureen Long::Yale University--", "title":"DI23A-07: Testing geodynamic models of lowermost mantle flow with a regional shear wave splitting data set", "abstract":"Global flow models rely on a number of assumptions, including composition, temperature, viscosity, and deformation mechanism. In the upper mantle, flow models and their associated assumptions can be tested and refined with observations of seismic anisotropy, which is treated as a proxy for flow direction. Beneath the transition zone, direct observations of seismic anisotropy are scarce, except for in the lowermost ~250 km of the mantle. In this study, we utilize a comprehensive, previously published (Ford et al., 2015) shear wave splitting study in order to test a three-dimensional global geodynamic flow model (Walker et al., 2011). Our study focuses on a region of the lowermost mantle along the eastern edge of the African Superplume beneath the Afar region. We find that our observations are fit by a model which invokes slip along the (010) plane of post-perovskite with flow directed down and to the southwest. Critically, we demonstrate the ability of a regional data set to interrogate models of lower mantle flow.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85220", "section":"Earth's Deep Interior"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85222" } }
{"authors":"Brian Meland::University of Denver--James Wilson::Univ Denver--Duncan Axisa::University Corporation for Atmospheric Research--", "title":"A51N-0280: A Comprehensive Archive of Aerosol and Trace Gas Spatial Distributions for Model and Satellite Validation", "abstract":"The University of Denver Aerosol Group has assembled measured aerosol size distributions, gaseous concentrations, and atmospheric state variables covering a 30 year time period into one comprehensive archive. Measurements were made during the period 1987-2013 and include data from a total of 21 NASA field campaigns. Measurements were taken from the ground to over 21 km in altitude, from 72 S Latitude to 90 N latitude on over 300 individual flights on NASA Research Aircraft. Aerosol measurements were made with the University of Denver’s Nucleation-Mode Aerosol Size Spectrometer (NMASS), Focused Cavity Aerosol Spectrometer, and/or a low-pressure Condensation Particle Counter (CPC) depending on the specific campaign. The science payloads varied with the campaign objectives, but the aerosol data were invariably acquired in conjunction with measurements by other investigators placing them in the context of atmospheric composition. The archive includes location and time of the measurements along with the tropopause heights and selected atmospheric composition and state data such as ambient temperatures and pressures, abundances of ozone, N2O, oxides of nitrogen, water vapor, CO2 etc. The data archive is stored in NetCDF format and includes all relevant metadata for measured quantities. This archive will be hosted by NASA and will be available to the public for model validation. The data includes indexing by scientific campaign, date, and spatial coordinates. This will facilitate comparisons across the available range of times, locations and related measurements. This data set has been used for validation of satellite remote sensing data. Coincident measurements of aerosol size distributions were used to calculate extinction profiles which were compared to those retrieved with the SAGE II satellite. Agreement between extinctions derived from the in situ size measurements and those provided by SAGE II was good for the 452, 525, and 1020 nm wavelength channels, but poor for the 386 nm channel. Profiles of aerosol number concentrations measured over the altitude range from 4 to 20 km are provided for 11 locations ranging from Punta Arenas, Chile (53 S) to Kiruna, Sweden (67 N). Profiles of aerosol surface area concentration and aerosol volume concentration are provided for 7 locations spread from 43 S to 67 N.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85222", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85223" } }
{"authors":"Eirik Krogstad::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Timothy Linley::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Megan Nims::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Jill Janak::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--", "title":"H31N-07: Migratory Fish as Sensors of Anthropogenic Contamination in Streams", "abstract":"Migratory fish take up metals in their stream environments, with the magnitude of uptake being dependent on the local concentration and biological pathway of the element. Some metals have long biological half-lives, and are present within fish for long periods after the fish leave the environments in which those signatures were attained. Within the Columbia River basin of western USA and Canada, tributaries have various elemental signatures of mining and industrial activity, which combined with isotopic signature of industrial elements (Hg, Cd, Pb, etc.) and natural geological isotopic variations of, e.g., Sr, allow life histories of fish to be delineated. Tributaries of the Columbia River flowing into the impounded waters above Grand Coulee Dam offer a record of contamination in fish tissues, which may be correlated with habitat signatures. Point sources, such as sulfide smelters and mining districts, allow particular streams and parts of streams to be identified from their Pb, Sr, and Cd isotopic and trace element concentration signatures. A greater number of elemental and isotopic methods employed in such studies increases the source habitat specificity of this method.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85223", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85224" } }
{"authors":"Jodi Johnson-Maynard::University of Idaho--Kristy Borrelli::University of Idaho--Kattlyn Wolf::University of Idaho--Leigh Bernacchi::University of California Merced--Sanford Eigenbrode::University of Idaho--Dianne Daley Laursen::University of Idaho--", "title":"ED11D-0871: Building Interdisciplinary Research and Communication Skills in the Agricultural and Climate Sciences", "abstract":"Preparing scientists and educators to create and promote practical science-based agricultural approaches to climate change adaptation and mitigation is a main focus of the Regional Approaches to Climate Change (REACCH) project. Social, political and environmental complexities and interactions require that future scientists work across disciplines rather than having isolated knowledge of one specific subject area. Additionally, it is important for graduate students earning M.S. or Ph.D. degrees in agriculture and climate sciences to be able to communicate scientific findings effectively to non-scientific audiences. Unfortunately, university graduate curricula rarely adequately prepare students with these important skills. REACCH recognizes the need for graduate students to have thorough exposure to other disciplines and to be able to communicate information for outreach and education purposes. These priorities have been incorporated into graduate training within the REACCH project. The interdisciplinary nature of the project and its sophisticated digital infrastructure provide graduate students multiple opportunities to gain these experiences. The project includes over 30 graduate students from 20 different disciplines and research foci including agronomy, biogeochemistry, soil quality, conservation tillage, hydrology, pest and beneficial organisms, economics, modeling, remote sensing, science education and climate science. Professional develop workshops were developed and held during annual project meetings to enhance student training. The “Toolbox” survey ( http://www.cals.uidaho.edu/toolbox/ ) was used to achieve effective interdisciplinary communication. Interdisciplinary extension and education projects were required to allow students to gain experience with collaboration and working with stakeholder groups. Results of student surveys and rubrics developed to gauge success in interdisciplinary research and communication may provide a helpful starting point for future projects involving graduate student training.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85224", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85225" } }
{"authors":"H.J. Jost::Thermo Fisher Scientific--Andrea Luca Rizzo::Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia--Marco Liuzzo::Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia--Marie-Anne Ancellin::Ecole Nazionale Superieure de Geologie--", "title":"V11G-01: Multi-day, real-time measurements of CO2 concentration, CO2/SO2 ratios, and d13C of CO2 in volcanic plume", "abstract":"New real-time measurements of CO2 /SO2 ratios, the CO2 concentration and δ13C of CO2 were acquired from July 16 to 20, 2014 in the active plume about 1 km away from the source at the Central Craters of Mount Etna volcano, Italy. During this innovative study we measured d13C in plume gases at a frequency of 0.1 Hz over 5 days of measurements. Assuming two member mixing processes, the extrapolated carbon-isotope composition of the volcanic CO2 ranged from –1.3‰ to +1.5‰, with uncertainties in the repeated single measurements (i.e., made over periods from 4 to 20 min) that were generally <0.7‰, and surprisingly larger variations over the 5-day study period. The range of extrapolated d13C values mostly overlaps with that obtained by discrete sampling and using isotope-ratio mass spectrometry technique (–2.5‰ < d13C < –0.5‰). However, the particular conditions of volcanic activity during the campaign lead us to propose that the carbon-isotope composition of CO2 degassed from magma can reach values (up to +1.5‰), higher than previously reported. Simultaneous measurements of the CO2 and SO2 concentrations using the MultiGAS technique were also performed. The volcanic d13C and CO2/SO2 ratios exhibited similar trends over the 5 days of measurements, with the ratios of both tracers peaking on July 16, possibly as a result of the early degassing of CO2 while an eruption was ongoing at Mount Etna. New questions about the variability of this geochemical tracer arise from the observed variations and the highest d13C values measured at Mount Etna during this campaign. The comparisons with the CO2/SO2 ratio also confirm that monitoring d13C in plume gases in real time, coupled to other geochemical tracers, is important for elucidating the magma dynamics at depth.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85225", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85226" } }
{"authors":"Carol Wilson::Vanderbilt University--Steven Goodbred::Vanderbilt-Earth & Envir Scies--Ryan Sincavage::Vanderbilt University--Michael Steckler::Columbia University of New York--Jennifer Pickering::Vanderbilt University--", "title":"EP33E-04: Linking process, morphology, and stratigraphy in the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna delta", "abstract":"The Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna delta (GBMD) is characterized as a composite system with an upland fluvial fan delta, a lowland, backwater-reach delta, a downdrift tidal delta plain, and an offshore subaqueous-delta, reflecting the respective dominance of fluvial, tidal, and marine processes. Topographic transitions, coupled with surface morphology and underlying stratigraphy define the temporally and spatially integrated patterns of river behavior and sediment dispersal that characterize the delta system. These play important roles in the scale of natural hazards, such as flooding and storm surges, affecting the 150 million inhabitants of the GBMD. Within the upland fan delta, aggradation of mobile braided channels within the active rivers support the wide-scale distribution of bed- and suspended-load sands that constitute nearly the entire underlying architecture of upper GBMD stratigraphy. Finer silt-dominated facies form on the floodplain from overbank deposition during waning stages of flow; however preservation is very low and localized because of the persistent lateral migration of braided channels. A differentiation in stream morphology and channel behavior is associated with a sharp decrease in stream gradient, channel avulsion and abandonment, and the transition across the backwater. Deposition and preservation of fine-grained mud and organic-rich successions are concentrated within broad interdistributary basins of the lowland fluvial plain or within tectonically subsiding Sylhet Basin. While ~15% of the 1 x 109 t yr-1 sediment load carried by the rivers is advected along shore and inland via tidal activity, a rapidly prograding subaqueous clinoform and the adjacent Swatch of No Ground canyon system offshore receive ~50% of the modern sediment load. The overall stability of the GBMD landform, relative to many deltas, reflects the efficient, widespread dispersal of sediment by the large monsoon discharge and high-energy tides that affect this region. Understanding the processes that define inorganic and organic deposition and preservation is useful not only for delta development models, but also informing delta restoration efforts worldwide.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85226", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85227" } }
{"authors":"Taufique Mahmood::University of North Dakota University of Saskatchewan--John Pomeroy::University of Saskatchewan--Howard Wheater::University of Saskatchewan--Jane Elliott::Environment Canada Saskatoon--Helen Baulch::University of Saskatchewan--Karl-Erich Lindenschmidt::Global Institute for Water Security, University of Saskatchewan--", "title":"H13C-1560: Nutrient Models Developments Using Runoff-Nutrient Relationships in an Agricultural Prairie Basin, Manitoba.", "abstract":"Nutrient export to streams and lakes from agricultural activities can result in significant deterioration of water quality and aquatic ecosystem health. In Western Canada, particular concerns arise for prairie agricultural systems, which are dominated by the effects of a cold climate. Insufficient attention has been given to understand the links between cold region watershed responses and nutrient concentration and a robust watershed-scale modeling framework is needed to simulate nutrient concentration and loads. Long-term, field observations of nutrient concentration-runoff relationships were used to develop nutrient concentration models for the Tobacco Creek Model Watershed (TCMW) which drains into the Red River basin. Field observations include streamflow concentrations of N and P at multiple scales from two headwater basins. Distinct nutrient concentration-runoff models for snowmelt, rain on snow (ROS) and rainfall runoff processes were developed from observed runoff-nutrient concentration relationships. Snowmelt runoff had a moderately positive correlation with particulate nutrient concentrations but no correlation with that of dissolved nutrients. ROS runoff had a weak relationship with both particulate and dissolved nutrient concentrations. Rainfall runoff had the strongest positive correlation with particulate nutrient concentrations but no association with that of dissolved nutrients. The modeling approach also identified a clear hysteretic behavior in the relationship between runoff and particulate nutrient concentration during the 2013 snowmelt runoff event at the basin outlet gauge. The models provide insight into the hydrological controls on nutrient export from cold regions watersheds and the strong effects of inter-annual climatic variability. Snowmelt runoff is a reliable exporter of large nutrient loads while nutrient export by rainfall runoff exceeded snowmelt runoff during hydrologically wet summers such as 2002, 2005, 2011 and 2013.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85227", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85228" } }
{"authors":"Jeffrey Marshall::California State Polytechnic University Pomona--James Spotila::Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University--Thomas Gardner::Trinity University--Marino Protti::Observatorio Vulcanológico y Sismológico de Costa Rica--Eli LaFromboise::California State University Northridge--Shawn Morrish::California State Polytechnic University Pomona--Melissa Robinson::California State Polytechnic University Pomona--Andrew Barnhart::California State Polytechnic University Pomona--Amber Butcher::California State Polytechnic University Pomona--Fookgiin Khaw::California State Polytechnic University Pomona--Peter Piestrzeniewicz::California State Polytechnic University Pomona--Brent Ritzinger::California State Polytechnic University Pomona--John Utick::California State Polytechnic University Pomona--Kacie Wellington::California State Polytechnic University Pomona--", "title":"T13F-08: Forearc Morphotectonics and Megathrust Earthquakes Along the Middle America Convergent Margin, Nicoya Peninsula, Costa Rica", "abstract":"The Nicoya Peninsula, Costa Rica forms a prominent morphologic high along the Middle America forearc where the Cocos plate subducts beneath the Caribbean plate at 8.5 cm/yr. This emergent coastal landmass lies directly above the megathrust along a seismogenic zone that produces frequent major earthquakes. Along the Nicoya coast, Quaternary marine and fluvial terraces record net uplift in a pattern that shadows the peninsula's overall topographic form. Terrace mapping, surveying, and age dating (14C, OSL, TCN) reveal uplift variations that coincide with three contrasting domains of subducting seafloor (EPR, CNS-1, CNS-2). Uplift rates vary between 0.1-0.2 m/ky inboard of older EPR crust in the north; 0.2-0.5 m/ky inboard of younger CNS-1 crust along the central coast; and 1.5-2.5 m/ky inboard of CNS-2 seamounts impacting the peninsula’s southern tip. GIS digital terrain analysis reveals a deformation pattern consistent with field geomorphic and geologic observations. The two largest Nicoya earthquakes in the past century (1950 Mw7.8; 2012 Mw7.6) each generated decimeter-scale coseismic uplift along the central coast. The 2012 uplift pattern coincides with the area of pre-event locking, mainshock slip, prior 1950 rupture, and 1950 coseismic uplift. Most of the 1950 uplift was recovered by gradual interseismic subsidence during six decades of strain accumulation leading to the 2012 rupture. Paleoseismic sediment coring in Nicoya coastal wetlands reveals fragmentary stratigraphic evidence consistent with earlier Holocene earthquake induced changes in land level. While elastic strain accumulation and release produce short-term cycles of uplift and subsidence, long-term net uplift results in gradual coastal emergence and the growth of topographic relief. Net uplift along the central Nicoya segment may be the product of irrecoverable seismic cycle strain (shortening), coupled with tectonic erosion near the trench and subsequent underplating of eroded material at depth beneath the peninsula. Our results are consistent with geophysical observations that indicate along-strike segmentation of the Nicoya seismogenic zone and the presence of three principal source areas for large earthquakes: 1) Papagayo (1916, M>7.0), 2) Nicoya (1950, Mw7.8; 2012 Mw7.6), and 3) Cobano (1990 Mw7.3).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85228", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85229" } }
{"authors":"Jennifer Genetti::San Francisco State University--Leonard Sklar::San Francisco State University--Shirin Leclere::San Francisco State University--", "title":"EP41C-0944: Field measurements confirm that hillslope sediment size varies with elevation and geomorphic process regime at Inyo Creek, California", "abstract":"Correlating the spatial variation of hillslope sediment grain size with geomorphic process regimes is essential for understanding feedbacks between sediment production on hillslopes and channel processes. At our field site at Inyo Creek, California, an elevation gradient in the size of sediment produced on hillslopes has been quantified using cosmogenic nuclides and detrital thermochronometry with samples collected at the outlet. Here we report field measurements of surface sediment size from hillslopes within the catchment, which validate those findings. Specifically, we use multiple field methods to measure hillslope grain size distributions, and correlate size variations with geomorphic process regimes across an elevation gradient. We select sampling sites from maps of predicted grain size created by overlaying landscape attributes in GIS to delineate geomorphic landscape units (GLUs). Geomorphic process regimes include bare bedrock, angle of repose slopes of talus, landslide deposits and soil mantled convex hillslopes. We use tape transects and point counts to quantify size distributions of regolith covered slopes. We also analyze photographs using The Digital Grain Size Project software, and for sediments too small to be resolved in photos we collect bulk samples for sieve analysis in the lab. To measure joint spacing, and infer the initial size distribution of rock fragments produced by bare bedrock, we use combine photographs with measurements made with tape transects, and aerial photographs for inaccessible areas. Our findings indicate that higher elevation slopes do indeed supply coarser sediment. Lower elevations have bimodal size distributions composed of sand with scattered boulders, while at higher elevations, slopes are composed a unimodal distribution of gravel, cobbles, and boulders. While boulder density does not vary significantly with elevation, we find a highly significant linear increase in the fraction of gravel and cobble-sized particles with elevation. Bedrock exposure also increases with elevation, becoming the dominant land cover in the upper catchment; bedrock at lower elevations appears more weathered in comparison to bedrock at higher elevations. Ongoing work includes analysis of joint spacing, bulk samples, and correlation with geomorphic process regimes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85229", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85230" } }
{"authors":"Beatrice Gordon::University of Wyoming--Niels Claes::UWYO--Scott Miller::Univ Wyoming--Ginger Paige::University of Wyoming--Andrew Parsekian::University of Wyoming--Daniel Beverly::University of Wyoming--", "title":"H31F-1478: A Comparison of Methods for Estimating Evapotranspiration (ET) in a Semi-Arid Agricultural System", "abstract":"In the intermountain West, much like the rest of the world, agriculture is the oldest and largest water consumer. Particularly in the arid headwaters states of the intermountain west changing water demands are highlighting the importance of water use efficiency in agriculture. In flood irrigation an area is irrigated until saturation is achieved although crops only consume a portion of the total water applied. The remaining water eventually returns to streams or aquifers. Accurately quantifying the portion of applied water that is consumptively used—and its corollary in the form of return flows—represents an important avenue for potential water use reduction in the face of increasing demands from sundry downstream users. Consumptive use has historically been understood as the difference between the irrigation water applied and irrigation water returned to adjacent surface waters via quick or delayed return flow as well as overland flow. Penman-derived models, which calculate evapotranspiration based on meteorological data, are another widely recognized method for estimating consumptive use. We determined consumptive use on an agricultural field in northeastern Wyoming using both of these two traditional methods as well as a quantitative scintillometer-based estimate, which couples meteorological data with the latent heat flux across a field to measure evapotranspiration for a given area. Since the wider application of the scintillometer is limited by the instrument’s complexity and cost, a comparison of the resulting data with these two more customary methods provides critical insight in to where certain methods might under or overestimate consumptive use. The purpose of this comparison is twofold. First, the comparison of these three methods allows for the optimization of a reach-scale water budget that aims to better characterize and quantify return flow processes. Second, the addition of information that couples hydrology, meteorology, geophysics, and heat fluxes over one particular area enhances the corpus of comparative data from which academics and managers can refine extant strategies for consumptive use estimation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85230", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85231" } }
{"authors":"Dan Park::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--", "title":"B21C-0467: Characterization of Uranium Tolerance and Biomineralization Potential of Caulobacter crescentus", "abstract":"Due to its high toxicity and mobility, U(VI) poses a major environmental threat to ecosystems. The ubiquitous aerobic bacterium Caulobacter cresecentus is an attractive candidate for U(VI) bioremediation because of its ability to survive in low-nutrient environments (5, 6), tolerate high U concentrations and mineralize U(VI) aerobically through the formation of uranyl phosphate (U-Pi) precipitates. Despite these attractive environmental properties, both a systems level understanding of the adaptive response pathways involved in U tolerance and the environmental conditions affecting the biomineralization process and stability of biogenic U-Pi minerals remain limited. By measuring changes in both mRNA and protein expression during exposure to high U levels, we have identified the core stress response pathways involved in U tolerance. Pathways associated with heat shock, lipospolysaccharide biosynthesis and transport, outer membrane lipoprotein transport and outermembrane assembly were highly induced at both the RNA and protein levels. Correspondingly, removal of integral components of proteolysis pathways including clpA, clpS and degP significantly reduced U tolerance under biomineralization conditions. Surprisingly, in contrast to many other heavy metals, U did not cause oxidative stress or DNA damage. Together, these analyses indicate that U predominately targets the outermembrane and causes mis-folding of both cytoplasmic and extracytoplasmic proteins. Efforts are currently underway to characterize the morphological and structural properties of biogenic U-Pi minerals and the environmental factors that influence their production and stability. Preliminary AFM studies suggest that U-Pi minerals formed under biomineralization conditions appear morphologically distinct from those formed abiotically between U(VI) and inorganic phosphate. Additionally, we observed that biomineralization tolerates a wide pH range (pH 6-9). Our long-range goal is the development of a conceptual model of the role of microbes in U cycling under oxidizing conditions across the DOE complex, and ultimately, provide DOE with the scientific basis to support decisions for the remediation of legacy sites.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85231", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85232" } }
{"authors":"Adam Watts::Desert Research Institute Reno--", "title":"NH43C-1898: Evaluating and operationalizing unmanned aircraft for wildland fire use", "abstract":"Many potential uses of unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) related to wildland fire research and operations have been demonstrated, but the vast majority of these have been proof-of-concept or one-time flights. Scientists, practitioners, and firefighting agencies look forward to the widespread adoption of this powerful technology and its regular use. Similarly, the UAS industry awaits opportunities for commercialization. Our collaboration brings together UAS industry, research and management agencies, and universities in the USA and Canada to investigate the perceived effectiveness of UAS for wildland fire use, and the factors affecting their commercial-scale employment. Our current and future activities include market research, training and technology transfer, and deployment of UAS over fires to promote development of sensors as well as their safe integration into fire operations. We will present initial results, and as a part of our presentation we also invite participation of the AGU community for planned future project phases. We anticipate that the outcomes of our work will be useful to potential users who are unfamiliar with UAS, and to researchers and practitioners with experience or an interest in their use in fire and related natural-resource disciplines.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85232", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85233" } }
{"authors":"Ekaterina Tymofyeyeva::University of California San Diego--Yuri Fialko::University of California San Diego Scripps Institution of Oceanography--", "title":"G21A-1005: Is there a ` blind`  strike-slip fault at the southern end of the San Jacinto Fault system?", "abstract":"We have studied the interseismic deformation at the southern end of the San Jacinto fault system using Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) and Global Positioning System (GPS) data. To complement the continuous GPS measurements from the PBO network, we have conducted campaign-style GPS surveys of 19 benchmarks along Highway 78 in the years 2012, 2013, and 2014. We processed the campaign GPS data using GAMIT to obtain horizontal velocities. The data show high velocity gradients East of the surface trace of the Coyote Creek Fault. We also processed InSAR data from the ascending and descending tracks of the ENVISAT mission between the years 2003 and 2010. The InSAR data were corrected for atmospheric artifacts using an iterative common point stacking method. We combined average velocities from different look angles to isolate the fault-parallel velocity field, and used fault-parallel velocities to compute strain rate. We filtered the data over a range of wavelengths prior to numerical differentiation, to reduce the effects of noise and to investigate both shallow and deep sources of deformation. At spatial wavelengths less than 2km the strain rate data show prominent anomalies along the San Andreas and Superstition Hills faults, where shallow creep has been documented by previous studies. Similar anomalies are also observed along parts of the Coyote Creek Fault, San Felipe Fault, and an unmapped southern continuation of the Clark strand of the San Jacinto Fault. At wavelengths on the order of 20km, we observe elevated strain rates concentrated east of the Coyote Creek Fault. The long-wavelength strain anomaly east of the Coyote Creek Fault, and the localized shallow creep observed in the short-wavelength strain rate data over the same area suggest that there may be a ` blind`  segment of the Clark Fault that accommodates a significant portion of the deformation on the southern end of the San Jacinto Fault.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85233", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85234" } }
{"authors":"Soty Odoh::University of Houston--Joel Saylor::University of Houston--Camilo Higuera-Diaz::External Advisor--Thomas Lapen::University of Houston--Peter Copeland::University of Houston--", "title":"V53D-3151: Coarse Grain Progradation in a Foreland basin: Application of Detrital Zircon Double Dating to Cenozoic Stratigraphy, Eastern Cordillera, Colombia.", "abstract":"Progradation of coarse clastic material into distal foreland basins has been attributed to both 1) enhanced sediment production during rapid tectonic exhumation and 2) sediment reworking during tectonic quiescence. The Floresta and Medina basins in the Eastern Cordillera record deposition of alternating coarse- and fine-grained clastic strata in medial and distal (respectively) Cenozoic foreland basins. The Medina Basin records the continued eastward progradation of the deformation front in the Neogene. We use detrital zircon U-Pb (ZPb) and (U-Th)/He (ZHe) analyses from the Paleogene Floresta Basin and the entire Cenozoic Medina Basin record to evaluate the effects of episodic thrust-belt exhumation and wide-spread deposition of coarse-grained sediments in the adjacent foreland basin. Both ZPb and ZHe systems are applied to individual grains (double dating) to constrain source area and up-section variations in exhumation rates. Changes in exhumation rate or introduction of new sediment sources are recorded as changes in lag time (ZHe age – depositional age). Analysis of 6 samples from the Floresta Basin shows a decrease in lag time during deposition of the coarse-grained middle Eocene Picacho Formation and upper Paleocene Socha Sandstone suggesting that Paleogene deposition of coarse-grained intervals in this medial location corresponds to an increase in exhumation rate. However, initial results from the Medina basin are less clear as there is evidence for Paleocene volcanic input but no clear evidence for thrust-belt related sediment until the Oligocene-early Miocene. We interpret the evidence for different sediment sources for Eocene strata in the axial Eastern Cordillera (Floresta) versus the Eastern foothills (Medina) as indicative of separation of these two regions by an emergent forebulge. Exhumation rate and granularity appear to be inversely correlated in post-Oligocene strata, though confirmation of initial interpretations awaits larger samples sizes", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85234", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85235" } }
{"authors":"Melissa Schwan::University of Arizona--Christina Herrick::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Erik Hobbie::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Janet Chen::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Ruth Varner::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Michael Palace::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Erin Marek::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Natalie Kashi::Villanova University--Stephanie Smith::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--", "title":"B31C-0575: High-Resolution Remote Sensing and Stable Isotope Patterns Across Heath-Shrub-Forest Ecotone at Abisko and Vassijaure, Northern Sweden", "abstract":"Rapid warming in arctic and sub-arctic environments shifts plant community structure which in turn can alter carbon cycling by releasing large stocks of carbon sequestered in arctic soils. Much work has been done in sub-arctic peatlands to understand how shifts in dominant vegetation cover can ultimately affect global carbon balances, but less focus has been given to upland environments where similar changes are occurring. Recent circumpolar expansion of deciduous shrubs and trees in sub-arctic upland environments may alter carbon cycling due to shrubs and trees sequestering less C in soils than the heath plants they typically replace. In this study we explored the relationship between nutrient and carbon cycling and above-ground vegetation on six transects which traverse an ecotone gradient from heath tundra (dominated by ericoid mycorrhizal plants) through deciduous shrubs to deciduous trees (dominated by ectomycorrhizal plants) in upland environments of sub-arctic Sweden near Vassijaure (~850 mm precipitation) and Abisko (~300 mm precipitation). We collected soil and foliage for analysis of natural abundances of stable carbon and nitrogen isotopes (δ13C and δ15N), which can be a sensitive indicator of C and N dynamics. We also took high-resolution remote aerial imagery over the transects to calculate percent cover of vegetation types using GIS software. We concurrently estimated percent cover in smaller plots on the ground of three dominant species, Empetrum nigrum, Betula nana, and Betula pubescens, to serve as ground-truthing for the aerial imagery. Analysis of vegetation cover data shows significant differences in vegetation types along the transects. Preliminary multiple regression analysis of isotopes shows that δ13C in organic soil at the Vassijaure site is mostly controlled by distance along the transect, an interaction term between transect distance and soil depth, and δ15N (adjusted r2 = 0.85, p < 0.0001). Values of δ13C were lower in soils in the shrubs and forest than in the heath. In regression analyses, δ15N was primarily controlled by depth, and secondarily by heath cover (adjusted r2 = 0.68, p < 0.0001). These results suggest that trees and shrubs are sequestering carbon, and interactions between plants and belowground soil communities may be driving nitrogen dynamics.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85235", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85236" } }
{"authors":"Steven Quiring::Texas A & M University College Station--Jessica Lucido::U.S. Geological Survey Center for Integrated Data Analytics--Luke Winslow::U.S. Geological Survey--Trent Ford::Southern Illinois University Carbondale--Partha Bijoy Baruah::Texas A & M University College Station--James Verdin::USGS/EROS--Roger Pulwarty::NOAA Climate Program Office--Michael Strobel::Natural Resources Conservation Service Portland--", "title":"IN41B-1704: Development of a Coordinated National Soil Moisture Network: A Pilot Study", "abstract":"Soil moisture is critical for accurate drought assessment and forecasting, identifying flood potential, climate modeling, estimation of crop yields and water budgeting. However, soil moisture data are collected by many agencies and organizations in the United States using a variety of instruments and methods for varying applications. These data are often distributed and represented in disparate formats, posing significant challenges for reuse. Recognizing this need, the President’s Climate Action Plan called for the creation of a coordinated national soil moisture network. In response, a team led by the National Integrated Drought Information System has completed a proof-of-concept pilot project. The pilot comprises both in-situ and assimilated soil moisture datasets. It focuses on providing real-time soil moisture data via standard web services to feed map-based visualization tools in order to meet the following use cases: operational drought monitoring, experimental land surface modeling, and operational hydrological modeling. The result of this pilot is a reference architecture that will inform the implementation of the national network.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85236", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85237" } }
{"authors":"Xuemei Wang::Southwest University--", "title":"GC23L-1249: Analysis on development situation and tendency of international Qinghai-Tibet Plateau studies", "abstract":"Qinghai-Tibet Plateau is one of the hotspots of the international earth science studies. The relative research papers have proliferated especially since 21st century. By using the the latest bibliometric indicators, the statistical analysis of the quantities and qualities was carried out for the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau literature indexed by SCIE during 1900 and 2012. It focused on the published years, journals, countries, cities, research institutes, international cooperation, and subjects. Some statistical results were displayed and deeply analyzed by using the tools of mapping knowledge domain (MKD) and geographic information system (GIS). The results of the Bibliometric analysis indicate that the publication and citation of QTP researches have a jump after entering the 21st century. China, USA, India, Canada and France are the main coutries engaged in the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau studies. Knowledge mapping results show that USA, UK and France have longer academic influential power of QTP researches, which indicates that these countries begin to study QTP early and the papers have longer permanent impacts. On the other hand, China, India and Japan have higher academic influential power in recent years, which indicate that these countries have more publications and higher impacts recently. The disciplines of QTP researches mainly focus on the geology, geochemistry &geophysics, environmental sciences &ecology, and so on. The spatial analysis indicates that the differences of the disciplines are emphasized by different countries. The above analysis results is hoped to integrate the new knowledge and reveal the development tendency of the QTP researches.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85237", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85238" } }
{"authors":"Ellyn Gray::University of California Berkeley--Dennis Baldocchi::University of California Berkeley--Allen Goldstein::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"A33H-0288: Impact of Air Pollution on California Central Valley Fog Frequency", "abstract":"Throughout the 20th century, trends in California Central Valley fog frequency have changed dramatically without explanation. While episodes of dense radiation fog, known regionally as Tule Fog, increased steadily from 1930-1970, analysis from both ground and remote sensing measurements confirm a 46-50% reduction in fog days in the last 30 years (Baldocchi and Waller, 2014, Herkes et al., 2014). The dominant hypotheses suggest that the recent decline in radiation fog can be explained by the rising temperatures associated with climate change or urban heat island effect. This assertion fails to explain the significant increase in Central Valley fog midcentury. Here we instead assert that changes in air pollution, rather than climate, better support this upward then downward temporal trend. Automobile use greatly increased emissions of nitrogen oxide (NOx) midcentury, followed by a large decrease in vehicle emissions due to statewide regulation from 1980 to present. In the Central Valley, NOx from automobile emissions contributes to the formation ammonium nitrate (NH4NO3), the dominant hygroscopic aerosol in the valley’s wintertime boundary layer that can act as cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) necessary for fog droplet formation. Thus, changes in air pollution not only affect the number of CCN, but may also impact the density and persistence of fog episodes. Using NOAA meteorological records throughout the twentieth century, we will show the correlation between fog frequency, air pollution, and climatic drivers. We conclude that fog trends are closely correlated with changes in air pollution, rather than solely climate change.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85238", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85239" } }
{"authors":"Hyun-Me Rhee::Chonnam National University--Dong-Hoon Sheen::Chonnam National University--", "title":"S11A-2778: A study on the seismic source parameters for earthquakes occurring in the southern Korean Peninsula", "abstract":"We investigated the characteristics of the seismic source parameters of the southern part of the Korean Peninsula for the 599 events with ML≥1.7 from 2001 to 2014. A large number of data are carefully selected by visual inspection in the time and frequency domains. The data set consist of 5,093 S-wave trains on three-component seismograms recorded at broadband seismograph stations which have been operating by the Korea Meteorological Administration and the Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources. The corner frequency, stress drop, and moment magnitude of each event were measured by using the modified method of Jo and Baag (2001), based on the methods of Snoke (1987) and Andrews (1986). We found that this method could improve the stability of the estimation of source parameters from S-wave displacement spectrum by an iterative process. Then, we compared the source parameters with those obtained from previous studies and investigated the source scaling relationship and the regional variations of source parameters in the southern Korean Peninsula.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85239", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85240" } }
{"authors":"Shane Byrne::University of Arizona--Margaret Landis::University of Arizona--Norbert Schorghofer::Univ of Hawaii at Manoa--Britney Schmidt::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--Carol Raymond::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Christopher Russell::University of California Los Angeles--", "title":"P53E-2188: Behavior and Stability of Ground Ice on Ceres: Initial Clues from Dawn", "abstract":"Models of the historical evolution of Ceres [1] and recent observations of surface geomorphology by the Dawn spacecraft [2] suggest a crust with a substantial fraction of water ice. However, clear spectral detections of ice are absent indicating that the uppermost material is dry. Further constraints on near surface ice come from detections of water vapor around Ceres by the Herschel telescope [3], which indicate production rates of 1026molecules per second. Here we build on the pioneering work of [4] and examine ground ice stability with the benefit of these new observations as well as accurate pole-vector determinations by Dawn. We model surface and subsurface temperatures on Ceres by balancing surface insolation, thermal emission and conduction to the subsurface. We estimate ice loss rates for both surface ice and ice covered with a low-thermal-inertia sublimation lag. Dawn observations show no large high-albedo regions indicating pure surface ice. In the case where pore-filling ice (50% ice by volume) extends to the surface, average loss rates range from almost zero (mm/Gyr) at the poles to several decimeters per year at the equator. These loss rates are suppressed by 2-3 orders of magnitude when this pore-filling ice is covered by even a few centimeters of dry sublimation lag, which is expected to form on geologically short timescales. Assuming negligible internal heat flux, we estimate the outgassing of water molecules expected from buried ice at all latitudes and in combination with previous work [5,6] find that the observations of [3] cannot be due to global sublimation of buried ice. Dawn observations also show the presence of small-scale high-albedo spots. Our models show that, if icy, the most prominent of these (in Occator crater) loses ~2cm/yr. Suggestively, the area and sublimation rates of the Occator bright spots match the observed vapor production rates of [3]. However, these high loss rates are difficult to reconcile with long-term spot persistence without a source of resupply. Continued monitoring by Dawn over the coming months in the high- and low-altitude mapping orbits will test for changes. [1] McCord and Sotin, J. Geophys. Res., 2005. [2] Schmidt et al., this conference. [3] Kuppers et al., Nature, 2014. [4] Fanale and Salvail, Icarus, 1989. [5] Schorghofer, Ast. J. 2008. [6] Schorghofer, LPSC 2015.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85240", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85241" } }
{"authors":"Rahul Palamuttam::University of California San Diego--Brian Wilson::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Renato Mogrovejo::ETH Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich--Kim Whitehall::Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology--Chris Mattmann::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Lewis McGibbney::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Paul Ramirez::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"IN51B-1816: SciSpark's SRDD : A Scientific Resilient Distributed Dataset for Multidimensional Data", "abstract":"Remote sensing data and climate model output are multi-dimensional arrays of massive sizes locked away in heterogeneous file formats (HDF5/4, NetCDF 3/4) and metadata models (HDF-EOS, CF) making it difficult to perform multi-stage, iterative science processing since each stage requires writing and reading data to and from disk. We have developed SciSpark, a robust Big Data framework, that extends ApacheTM Spark for scaling scientific computations. Apache Spark improves the map-reduce implementation in ApacheTM Hadoop for parallel computing on a cluster, by emphasizing in-memory computation, “spilling” to disk only as needed, and relying on lazy evaluation. Central to Spark is the Resilient Distributed Dataset (RDD), an in-memory distributed data structure that extends the functional paradigm provided by the Scala programming language. However, RDDs are ideal for tabular or unstructured data, and not for highly dimensional data. The SciSpark project introduces the Scientific Resilient Distributed Dataset (sRDD), a distributed-computing array structure which supports iterative scientific algorithms for multidimensional data. SciSpark processes data stored in NetCDF and HDF files by partitioning them across time or space and distributing the partitions among a cluster of compute nodes. We show usability and extensibility of SciSpark by implementing distributed algorithms for geospatial operations on large collections of multi-dimensional grids. In particular we address the problem of scaling an automated method for finding Mesoscale Convective Complexes. SciSpark provides a tensor interface to support the pluggability of different matrix libraries. We evaluate performance of the various matrix libraries in distributed pipelines, such as Nd4jTM and BreezeTM. We detail the architecture and design of SciSpark, our efforts to integrate climate science algorithms, parallel ingest and partitioning (sharding) of A-Train satellite observations from model grids. These solutions are encompassed in SciSpark, an open-source software framework for distributed computing on scientific data.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85241", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85242" } }
{"authors":"Lei Jiang::Sanya Institute of Deep-Sea Science and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences--", "title":"B23C-0631: Biomediated Precipitation of Calcium Carbonate in a Slightly Acidic Hot Spring", "abstract":"A slightly acidic hot spring named “Female Tower” (T=73.5 °C, pH=6.64) is located in the Jifei Geothermal Field, Yunnan Province, Southwest China. The precipitates in the hot spring are composed of large amounts of calcite, aragonite, and sulfur. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analyses revealed that the microbial mats were formed of various coccoid, rod-shaped, and filamentous microbes. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) showed that the intracellular sulfur granules were commonly associated with these microbes. A culture-independent molecular phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that the majority of the bacteria in the spring were sulfur-oxidizing bacteria. In the spring water, H2S concentration was up to 60 ppm, while SO42- concentration was only about 10 ppm. We speculated that H2S might be utilized by sulfur-oxidizing bacteria in this hot spring water, leading to the intracellular formation of sulfur granules. In the meantime, this reaction increased the pH in the micron-scale microdomains, which fostered the precipitation of calcium carbonate in the microbial mats. The results of this study indicated that the sulfur-oxidizing bacteria could play an important role in calcium carbonate precipitation in slightly acidic hot spring environments.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85242", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85243" } }
{"authors":"Zhenyu Xu::Purdue University--Julie Sheets::The Ohio State University--Qingyun Li::Washington University in St Louis--Timothy Kneafsey::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--David Cole::Ohio State University Main Campus--Young-Shin Jun::Washington University--Laura Pyrak-Nolte::Purdue Univ--", "title":"H41C-1313: Modification of Fracture Apertures by Reactive Multiphase Flow", "abstract":"Geochemical interactions during the withdrawal/injection of fluids into the subsurface can modify fracture apertures through dissolution and/or precipitation of minerals. Modification of fracture apertures during reactive flow is strongly affected by non-reactive, non-wetting fluids that limit the fracture surface area and void volume that can be affected by reactive phases. We present results on the effect of a non-reactive, non-wetting phase during reactive flow on the distribution of precipitates and channelization caused by dissolution in fractures. Transparent acrylic casts of a fracture in Austin chalk were used to image mineral precipitation during reactive flow. Initially, the fracture was saturated with a solution of 0.6mol/L NaHCO3 and 0.00085mol/L NaCl. Then, both the aqueous NaHCO3 - NaCl and a solution containing 3mol/L CaCl2 were pumped into the sample (0.5 ml/min) for 2 hrs. When the two solutions mix inside the fracture, CaCO3 precipitates form and CO2 bubbles are generated. CO2 bubbles affect the amount of precipitation. X-ray CT data show that precipitate thickness varies within the fracture, occurs on both fracture surfaces and also bridges the surfaces. In the test, where a CO2 bubble filled a void, precipitation did not occur. If the CO2 bubble was smaller than the pore, thin films of precipitates occurred on the fracture surfaces above and below the bubble. While fracture apertures controlled the mixing of the fluids, CO2 bubbles affected the thickness and distribution of the precipitates. From our numerical study, channelization in a fracture is affected by the presence of a non-wetting non-reactive phase (e.g. gas) during dissolution. A modified Navier-Stokes approach was used to calculate fluxes through spatially correlated aperture distributions as a function of gas saturation. Dissolution was taken to be proportional to flux. For gas saturations < 15%, channelization occurred along the dominant flow path. However, for gas saturations >25%, dissolution along the dominant flow path was prevented, a new dominant channel was formed and single phase flow rates decreased by a factor of 10. This work was supported by Center for Nanoscale Control of Geologic CO₂ (NCGC) an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by DOE, Office of Science, BES under Award # DE-AC02-05CH11231", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85243", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85244" } }
{"authors":"Paul Goodman::University of Arizona--Joellen Russell::University of Arizona--Nirav Merchant::University of Arizona--Susan Miller::University of Arizona--Amit Juneja::University of Arizona--", "title":"IN31A-1746: iClimate: a climate data and analysis portal", "abstract":"We will describe a new climate data and analysis portal called iClimate that facilitates direct comparisons between available climate observations and climate simulations. Modeled after the successful iPlant Collaborative Discovery Environment ( www.iplantcollaborative.org ) that allows plant scientists to trade and share environmental, physiological and genetic data and analyses, iClimate provides an easy-to-use platform for large-scale climate research, including the storage, sharing, automated preprocessing, analysis and high-end visualization of large and often disparate observational and model datasets. iClimate will promote data exploration and scientific discovery by providing: efficient and high-speed transfer of data from nodes around the globe (e.g. PCMDI and NASA); standardized and customized data/model metrics; efficient subsampling of datasets based on temporal period, geographical region or variable; and collaboration tools for sharing data, workflows, analysis results, and data visualizations with collaborators or with the community at large. We will present iClimate’s capabilities, and demonstrate how it will simplify and enhance the ability to do basic or cutting-edge climate research by professionals, laypeople and students.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85244", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85245" } }
{"authors":"Paul Tregoning::Australian National University--Simon McClusky::Australian National University--Anthony Purcell::Australian National University--Herbert McQueen::Australian National University--", "title":"G41B-04: How errors in the calibration of GRACE accelerometers affect the estimates of temporal gravity fields", "abstract":"Non-gravitational accelerations acting on each of the GRACE satellites are measured in the along-track, cross-track and radial directions by the accelerometers onboard each satellite. The calibration of the observed non-gravitational accelerations requires determining a scaling factor and (at least) an offset for the observations in each of the three directions. We demonstrate in this presentation how small errors in the scale factors used to calibrate the accelerometer observations affect the noise level in the estimated temporal gravity field. We performed a parameter space search to find the optimal scale factors that generated the smallest prefit range-rate residuals and found that we can model the satellite orbits without the use of any empirical parameters, whilst still being able to identify the temporal gravity field signal in the prefit KBRR residuals. We will describe some physical conditions when the satellites are in the shadow of the Earth that we use to constrain the estimates of calibration biases and scales and show how the noise level of the estimated temporal gravity field varies with and without the use of the optimal calibration values for the accelerometer observations. A similar approach will be both required and effective to calibrate the accelerometers onboard the GRACE Follow-On mission.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85245", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85246" } }
{"authors":"Michael Poulos::Boise State University--Jennifer Pierce::Boise State University--James McNamara::Boise State University--Alejandro Flores::Boise State University--Shawn Benner::Boise State University--", "title":"H11C-1363: Systematic Mapping and Statistical Analyses of Valley Landform and Vegetation Asymmetries Across Hydroclimatic Gradients", "abstract":"Terrain aspect alters the spatial distribution of insolation across topography, driving eco-pedo-hydro-geomorphic feedbacks that can alter landform evolution and result in valley asymmetries for a suite of land surface characteristics (e.g. slope length and steepness, vegetation, soil properties, and drainage development). Asymmetric valleys serve as natural laboratories for studying how landscapes respond to climate perturbation. In the semi-arid montane granodioritic terrain of the Idaho batholith, Northern Rocky Mountains, USA, prior works indicate that reduced insolation on northern (pole-facing) aspects prolongs snow pack persistence, and is associated with thicker, finer-grained soils, that retain more water, prolong the growing season, support coniferous forest rather than sagebrush steppe ecosystems, stabilize slopes at steeper angles, and produce sparser drainage networks. We hypothesize that the primary drivers of valley asymmetry development are changes in the pedon-scale water-balance that coalesce to alter catchment-scale runoff and drainage development, and ultimately cause the divide between north and south-facing land surfaces to migrate northward. We explore this conceptual framework by coupling land surface analyses with statistical modeling to assess relationships and the relative importance of land surface characteristics. Throughout the Idaho batholith, we systematically mapped and tabulated various statistical measures of landforms, land cover, and hydroclimate within discrete valley segments (n=~10,000). We developed a random forest based statistical model to predict valley slope asymmetry based upon numerous measures (n>300) of landscape asymmetries. Preliminary results suggest that drainages are tightly coupled with hillslopes throughout the region, with drainage-network slope being one of the strongest predictors of land-surface-averaged slope asymmetry. When slope-related statistics are excluded, due to possible autocorrelation, valley slope asymmetry is most strongly predicted by asymmetries of insolation and drainage density, which generally supports a water-balance based conceptual model of valley asymmetry development. Surprisingly, vegetation asymmetries had relatively low predictive importance.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85246", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85247" } }
{"authors":"Karl Lapo::University of Washington Seattle Campus--Laura Hinkelman::Univ of WA-JISAO--Jessica Lundquist::University of Washington--", "title":"A31C-0063: Evaluating patterns of solar irradiance errors over an area of complex topography", "abstract":"In a number of recent studies, errors in the downwelling shortwave irradiance (Qsi) have been shown to hinder the ability of physically-based land-surface models to simulate fluxes of energy and water and can lead to erroneous parameter values. However, the uncertainty in the forcing data, especially Qsi, is rarely considered, at least in part because the uncertainties in Qsi are not well-characterized over complex terrain. In this study we provide a novel evaluation and diagnosis of error sources for 4 different methods for estimating Qsi: NLDAS, MTCLIM, CERES Synoptic Fluxes and Clouds, and output from a regional reanalysis. These methods are evaluated over a study area in California spanning the Central Valley and Sierra Nevada, which contains 73 sites that observe Qsi over the period of 2002-2012. This environment represents a particular challenge for estimating Qsi due to cloud patterns over fine temporal (e.g., afternoon thunderstorms) and spatial (e.g., valley fog) scales. Since observations are made with lower-quality instruments, limiting absolute accuracy at any individual site, we instead use the spatial coherence in bias magnitude and sign to characterize errors. The absolute biases at all stations in the study domain over the study period are small (<20Wm-2). However, at the monthly scale, large biases between irradiance methods and groups of stations occur. Mountain stations west of the Sierra crest exhibit large (>40Wm-2) monthly biases while the stations nearby, but to the east of the crest, exhibit small, negative biases (<-20Wm-2). Valley stations have overall small errors during the winter, suggesting all methods capture the behavior of the persistent radiation fog that forms in the valley. In contrast, during late spring and summer, biases in Qsi increase dramatically (>80Wm-2), correlating with increasing aerosol optical depth. At high elevations the four methods disagree on the monthly mean of Qsi with a spread greater than 100Wm-2. Finally, we show how the choice of Qsi method impacts gradients of Qsi with elevation, mostly as a consequence of the method’s spatial resolution. These errors are attributable to differences in how each method estimates Qsi.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85247", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85248" } }
{"authors":"Samuel LeBlanc::NASA Ames Research Center Oak Ridge Associated Universities Inc.--Jens Redemann::NASA Ames Research Center--Michal Segal-Rosenhaimer::NASA Ames Research Center Bay Area Environmental Research Institute Sonoma--Meloe Kacenelenbogen::Bay Area Environmental Research Institute Sonoma NASA Ames Research Center--Yohei Shinozuka::Bay Area Environmental Research Institute Sonoma NASA Ames Research Center--Connor Flynn::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Sebastian Schmidt::University of Colorado--Peter Pilewskie::University of Colorado--Shi Song::University of Colorado--Sarah Woods::SPEC Inc--Paul Lawson::SPEC Inc--Athanasios Nenes::Georgia Institute of Technology--Jack Lin::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--Luke Ziemba::NASA Langley Research Center--", "title":"A42A-08: Implications of using transmitted vs. reflected light for determining cloud properties, cloud radiative effects and aerosol-cloud-interactions", "abstract":"Light transmitted through clouds is sensitive to a different cloud volume than reflected light at cloud top. This difference in sampling volumes has implications when calculating the radiative effects of clouds (CRE) and aerosol-cloud-interactions (ACI). We present a comparison of retrieved cloud properties and the corresponding CRE and ACI based on transmitted and reflected light for a cloud sampled during the Studies of Emissions and Atmospheric Composition, Clouds and Climate Coupling by Regional Surveys (SEAC4RS, 2013) field campaign. Measurements of zenith radiances were obtained from the NASA DC-8 aircraft using the Spectrometer for Sky-Scanning, Sun-Tracking Atmospheric Research (4STAR) instrument. 4STAR was deployed on an airborne platform during SEAC4RS alongside the Solar Spectral Flux Radiometer (SSFR). To retrieve cloud properties from transmitted shortwave radiation, we use a retrieval utilizing spectrally resolved measurements. Spectral features in shortwave radiation transmitted through clouds are sensitive to changes in cloud optical thickness, effective radius, and thermodynamic phase. The spectral features due to absorption and scattering processes by liquid water and ice cloud particles include shifts in spectral slopes, curvatures, maxima, and minima of cloud-transmitted radiance. These spectral features have been quantified by 15 parameters used to retrieve cloud properties from the 4STAR zenith radiances. Retrieved cloud optical thicknesses and effective radii based on transmitted shortwave radiation are compared to their counterparts obtained from reflected shortwave radiation measured above cloud with MODIS and with the enhanced MODIS Airborne Simulator (eMAS), the Research Scanning Polarimeter (RSP), and SSFR operating aboard the NASA ER-2 aircraft. Remotely sensed cloud particle effective radius are combined with in situ measurements of cloud and aerosol particles from the NASA Langley Aerosol Research Group Experiment (LARGE) CCN Counter and the cloud probes from SPEC Inc. By using the combination of in situ and remote sensors, we present an estimate of ACI at cloud base.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85248", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85249" } }
{"authors":"Malcolm Pritchard::Independent Schools Foundation Academy--", "title":"ED43B-0878: The Experientiality of Sustainability: Living with Our Choices", "abstract":"In an age when the escalating impact of human activity on the global environment has begun to threaten the long-term survival of humanity, increasing focus is being brought to bear on the scientific, social, economic, political, and cultural ramifications of the various courses of action open to individuals and societies across the globe. The intentional and intelligent modification of human behavior to balance environmental impact with human wellbeing is seen as the key to entering what Jeffrey Sachs has called the ‘Age of Sustainable Development’. There are mechanisms, legal, socio-cultural, religious, economic, and technological that may ameliorate to varying degrees the environmental impact of human activity. These mechanisms are explored at length in the literature and assessed by their capacity to encourage or compel compliant behavior. They rely heavily on individual and collective choices based on rational self-interest, which is in turn informed by knowledge. The role of education in facilitating sustainable human activity is a key feature of many contributions to the literature. The alarming shortcoming in these discussions is the absence of an effective approach to learned sustainability that may achieve the necessary changes in human behavior and particularly adult choices with respect to daily acts of consumption. Sustainable practices and choices are most effectively produced through immersion in experientially based learning programs aimed at elementary and secondary school students. The experience of sustainable living during the critical phase of personal identity formation is the key to shaping behavior, and not just imparting knowledge. This AGU education session, ED041: Teaching Sustainability and Human Impact through Collaborative Teaching Methods, explores the principles on which such experiential immersion learning contributes to genuine sustainable behaviors and choices through targeted, intelligently designed residential programs.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85249", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85250" } }
{"authors":"Miguel Cruz::Stanford University--Kristoffer Szilas::Stanford University--Marty Grove::Stanford University--", "title":"V33D-3149: Comparison of Ca and Ar Diffusion in Phlogopite: Implications for K-Ca and K-Ar Geochronology", "abstract":"Coupled geochronology based upon branched decay of 40K-40Ar and 40K-40Ca decay is rarely exploited because 40Ca is the major common isotope of calcium and 40Ca and 40K are difficult to resolve isotopically without resorting to isotope dilution wet chemistry. Recently developed ion microprobe methods based upon measurement of doubly ionized species partially overcome the latter problem and have been applied to high K/Ca micas. The ability to interpret K-Ar and K-Ca results is limited due to uncertainty in the relative diffusion properties of Ca and Ar. To address this problem, we are performing Ar and Ca diffusion experiments and fluid-crystal Ar partitioning experiments with anhydrous F-phlogopite that is stable to 1390°C. As an additional check, we are comparing K-Ca and K-Ar ages from natural mantle phlogopites from a variety of settings to assess the relative retentivity of Ar and Ca. South African xenoliths tend to yield 40Ar/39Ar ages that are much older than K-Ca ages from the same phologopites. Possible excess 40Ar and high common Ca render the comparisons inconclusive, but this suggests that Ca diffuses more readily than Ar in phlogopite. Our most definitive K-Ca phlogopite results (i.e., least affected by common Ca) come from the Archean Seqi dunite of SW Greenland. The K-Ca ages of Seqi phlogopites is 927 ± 26 Ma (2s). Incremental heating 40Ar/39Ar results from the same sample yields a much older result with a terminal age of 3.5 Ga. However, the first 5-10% of 39Ar release are consistent with transient heating at ca. 900 Ma. Considered together, the K-Ca and 40Ar/39Ar results from the Seqi dunite locality strongly suggest that Ca diffusion is more rapid than Ar diffusion in phlogopite.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85250", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85251" } }
{"authors":"Marc Fischer::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--", "title":"A43F-0356: A Survey of Methane Emissions from California’s Natural Gas Infrastructure", "abstract":"Methane emissions from natural gas infrastructure are estimated to contribute small but uncertain fractions of total natural gas consumed in California and of California’s total GHG budget. Because natural gas (NG) methane is an energy resource, an economic commodity, a potential health hazard, and a potent greenhouse gas, it is important to identify and quantify and control both intentional venting, and un-intentional leakages. Here, we report results of an observational survey, measuring NG methane emissions across examples from subsectors of California’s natural gas infrastructure, ranging from production and processing, to transmission and distribution, and notably including examples from the consumption subsector. At regional scales, a combination of tower and aircraft measurements are used to estimate emissions of NG methane for the San Francisco Bay Area. At facility scales, aircraft mass balance measurements are applied to estimate NG methane emissions from associated with individual petroleum production fields, NG storage facilities, and petroleum refineries. At local scales, ground-based roadway surveys are applied to place lower limits on NG emissions from aggregate leakage sources in selected urban and suburban areas, a sample of NG fueling stations, and a small number of capped gas wells. For a subset of the consumption subsector, mass balance and CH4:CO2 emission ratio measurements are used to estimate leakage from a sample of quiescent residential buildings and example operating gas appliances. In general, CH4 emissions are found to grow with the NG throughput in a given area or facility, though the observed ratio of leakage to throughput varies by more than an order of magnitude for some cases (e.g., urban areas), presumably in response to varied infrastructure type, vintage, and maintenance. Taken in sum, preliminary results of this initial survey are consistent with the commonly held assumption that total NG methane emissions from California NG infrastructure are likely less than 1% of total gas consumption, though this study cannot place an all-encompassing upper-limit at this time. In any case, we expect that the techniques described here will provide useful for prioritizing future NG leakage mitigation activities.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85251", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85252" } }
{"authors":"Mary Mwangi::University of Nairobi--", "title":"IN21D-1712: Probabilistic seasonal Forecasts to deterministic Farm Leve Decisions: Innovative Approach", "abstract":"Climate change and vulnerability are major challenges in ensuring household food security. Climate information services have the potential to cushion rural households from extreme climate risks. However, most the probabilistic nature of climate information products is not easily understood by majority of smallholder farmers. Despite the probabilistic nature, climate information have proved to be a valuable climate risk adaptation strategy at the farm level. This calls for innovative ways to help farmers understand and apply climate information services to inform their farm level decisions. The study endeavored to co-design and test appropriate innovation systems for climate information services uptake and scale up necessary for achieving climate risk development. In addition it also determined the conditions necessary to support the effective performance of the proposed innovation system. Data and information sources included systematic literature review, secondary sources, government statistics, focused group discussions, household surveys and semi-structured interviews. Data wasanalyzed using both quantitative and qualitative data analysis techniques. Quantitative data was analyzed using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) software. Qualitative data was analyzed using qualitative techniques, which involved establishing the categories and themes, relationships/patterns and conclusions in line with the study objectives. Sustainable livelihood, reduced household poverty and climate change resilience were the impact that resulted from the study.  ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85252", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85255" } }
{"authors":"Bernard Hallet::Univ Washington--Ronald Sletten::Univ Washington--Nicolas Mangold::LPGN Laboratoire de Planétologie et Géodynamique de Nantes--Dorothy Oehler::Johnson Space Center--Rebecca Williams::Planetary Science Institute Tucson--David Bish::Indiana University - Bloomington--Ezat Heydari::Jackson State University--David Rubin::University of California-Santa Cruz--Scott Rowland::Univ Hawaii--", "title":"NG23B-1787: Sub-meter desiccation crack patterns imaged by Curiosity at Gale Crater on Mars shed additional light on former lakes evident from examined outcrops", "abstract":"Small-scale desiccation crack patterns (mudcrack-like arrays of uniform ~0.1 to 1 m polygonal domains separated by linear or curving cracks in exposed bedding) imaged by Curiosity in Gale Crater, Mars complement a wealth of diverse data obtained from exposures of sedimentary rocks that point to deposition “in fluvial, deltaic, and lacustrine environments” including an “intracrater lake system likely [to have] existed intermittently for thousands to millions of years …”(e.g. Grotzinger et al., 2015, Science, submitted). We interpret these mudcrack-like patterns, found on many of the bedrock exposures imaged by Curiosity, as desiccation cracks that developed either of two ways: 1) at the soft sediment-air interface like common mudcracks, or 2) at or below the sediment-water interface by synaeresis or diastasis (involving differential compaction). In the context of recent studies of terrestrial mudcracks, and cracks formed experimentally in various wet powders as they loose moisture, these desiccation features reflect diverse aspects of the formative environment. If they formed as mudcracks, some of the lakes were shallow enough to permit the recurrent drying and wetting that can lead to the geometric regularity characteristic of several of sets of mudcracks. Moreover, the water likely contained little suspended sediment otherwise the mudcracks would be buried too rapidly for the crack pattern to persist and to mature into regular polygonal patterns. The preservation of these desiccation crack patterns does not require, but does not exclude, deep burial and exhumation. Although invisible from satellite because of their size, a multitude of Mastcam and Navcam images reveals these informative features in considerable detail. These images complement much evidence, mostly from HiRISE data from several regions, suggesting that potential desiccation polygons on larger scales may be more common on the surface of Mars than generally recognized.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85255", "section":"Nonlinear Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85256" } }
{"authors":"Sergey Borovikov::University of Alabama in Huntsville--Nikolai Pogorelov::University of Alabama in Huntsville--Jacob Heerikhuisen::University of Alabama in Huntsville--Ming Zhang::Florida Institute of Technology--", "title":"SH41C-2387: The Heliotail", "abstract":"The heliotail is formed when the solar wind (SW) interacts with the local interstellar medium (LISM) and is shaped by the interstellar magnetic field (ISMF). While there are no spacecraft to perform in situ measurements of the SW plasma and heliospheric magnetic field in the heliotail, it is of importance for the interpretation of measurements of energetic neutral atom fluxes performed by Interstellar Boundary Explorer (IBEX). It has been shown recently that the orientation of the heliotail in space and distortions of the unperturbed LISM caused by its presence may be able to explain some features in the anisotropy map of TeV cosmic ray flux detected in air shower experiments. The SW flow in the heliotail is a mystery itself because it is strongly affected by charge exchange between the SW ions and interstellar neutral atoms. If the angle between the Sun's magnetic and rotation axes is constant, the SW in the tail tends to be concentrated inside the heliospheric magnetic field spirals deflected tailward, exhibiting a two-lobe structure similar to Yu (1974) and Opher et al. (2015). However, the twisted field soon becomes unstable and the reason for the SW collimation within a two-lobe structure vanishes. The resulting solution exhibits features typical of magnetic reconnection. We demonstrate that kinetic treatment of the H atom transport becomes essential in this case to explain the lobe absence further along the tail. If the angle between the Sun’s magnetic and rotation axes is not constant, the flow collimation becomes latitudinally dependent. We show that the heliotail flow is strongly affected by the solar cycle that eliminates artifacts typical of solutions based on simplifying assumptions. The heliopause in the tail is subject to Kelvin--Helmholtz instability, but its orientation and shape are determined by the ISMF direction and strength.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85256", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85257" } }
{"authors":"Laura Mendes::UFRRJ Federal Rural University of Rio de Janeiro--Monica Heilbron::UERJ Rio de Janeiro State University--Kip Hodges::Arizona State University--Matthijs Van Soest::Arizona State University--Luiz Guilherme Silva::UERJ Rio de Janeiro State University--", "title":"V33D-3153: Low-Temperature Thermochronology Applied to Constrain the Multi-Episodic Thermotectonic Evolution of the Southeastern Continental Margin of Brazil", "abstract":"Low-temperature thermochronology was applied to constrain the Mesozoic and Cenozoic tectonic evolution of the continental margin of southeast Brazil. Using apatite (U-Th)/He thermochronology (AHe), we acquired data from 107 crystals of basement samples collected from a NW–SE transect in the Mantiqueira Mountains to the Guanabara Graben, as well as from the NE–SE transverse faults. The data range from 43.5 ± 1.9 Ma to 250.1 ± 8.7 Ma (2 σ) for corrected ages. The Neo-Cretaceous, Eo-Cretaceous, and Paleocene are the main recorded AHe ages, in order of importance. The Eo-Cretaceous ages indicate the occurrence of older thermal events related to a pre-rifting phase (~121 Ma). The Neo-Cretaceous ages signify the importance of tectonic and magmatic events, and regional uplifting for the thermal history of the study area, including ages related to the Serra do Mar Mountains uplift (~86 Ma). Paleocene ages seem to be related to the reactivation (~65 Ma), which was responsible for the continental rifts in the southeastern Brazil. Finally, the Eocene ages (49.7 Ma and 43.5 Ma), which are from samples restricted to the Resende Basin border faults, indicate a continental rift reactivation. Time–temperature (t–T) paths obtained from inverse modeling, performed using HeFTy (Ketcham, 2005) with a Radiation Damage Diffusion and Annealing Model (Flowers et al., 2009), suggests rapid cooling episodes for all samples. The main thermal events show a direct correlation with the timing of regional tectonic events: reactivation phases, continental margin uplift, and the sedimentary record. Apatite (U-Th)/He ages increase with distance from the coast and with elevation. However, these patterns are discontinued by samples of younger ages as a result of the reactivation process of pre-existing structures. The total estimated denudation range from 1.2 to 2.8 km. The erosion rates range from 15.2 to 35.3 m/My. Thus, the multi-episodic thermal events, which led to the formation of important regional tectonic and geomorphological features (Mantiqueira Mountains, Serra do Mar Mountains, grabens, and sedimentary basins), seem to play a fundamental role in the evolution of the Brazilian continental margin. The records can be found in the thermal history of rocks and its correlated deposits.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85257", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85258" } }
{"authors":"Seshadri Rajagopal::Desert Research Institute Reno--", "title":"GC23B-1142: Predicting Snow-To-Rain Transitions Across The Western U.S.: When Is Daily Air Temperature Sufficient?", "abstract":"The phase of precipitation at the land surface is critical for determining the timing and amount of water available for hydrological and ecological systems. Natural variability in precipitation phase due to elevation, micro-climate, and storm characteristics make it a challenge to predict phase. In addition, regional warming is expected to move the snow-rain elevation higher in the future, which has the potential to alter water availability. Despite this, there are few techniques for direct observation of precipitation phase and many predictive techniques apply simple temperature thresholds (i.e. 0 degree Celsius) to determine spatiotemporal patterns. In this paper, we asked two questions: 1) what is the optimum daily temperature for predicting snow-rain transitions in the mountains of the Western U.S.? and 2) what errors in precipitation phase estimation are associated with common temperature thresholds? We use 502 Snow Telemetry (SNOTEL) stations with data from 2004 to 2014 to determine rain versus snow using a combination of precipitation, snow depth, and SWE observations. From the observations, we determined that daily maximum temperature is a better predictor of rain and snow events than average temperature. The optimum temperature varied from -2.0 to 3 C, with an average of 0.3 C across ecoregions. The Northern Basin and Northern Cascades with lower average elevations had higher temperature thresholds and the Southern Rockies with highest elevations had the lowest thresholds. Developing a relationship based on station elevation improved the RMSE by 12%, whereas using an optimum temperature developed for each station improved the RMSE by 34% on average. While using optimum temperature thresholds reduce error in prediction, they do not eliminate misclassification of rain-show transitions. These results highlight a current weakness in our ability to predict the effects of regional warming that could have uneven impacts on water and ecological resource management across the Western U.S. Future efforts should consider including additional atmospheric information to improve the fidelity of precipitation phase prediction.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85258", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85259" } }
{"authors":"Kshitij Parajuli::Utah State University--Morteza Sadeghi::Utah State University--Scott Jones::Utah State University--", "title":"H23B-1589: Rock Content Influence on Soil Hydraulic Properties", "abstract":"Soil hydraulic properties including the soil water retention curve (SWRC) and hydraulic conductivity function are important characteristics of soil affecting a variety of soil properties and processes. The hydraulic properties are commonly measured for seived soils (i.e. particles < 2 mm), but many natural soils include rock fragments of varying size that alter bulk hydraulic properties. Relatively few studies have addressed this important problem using physically-based concepts. Motivated by this knowledge gap, we set out to describe soil hydraulic properties using binary mixtures (i.e. rock fragment inclusions in a soil matrix) based on individual properties of the rock and soil. As a first step of this study, special attention was devoted to the SWRC, where the impact of rock content on the SWRC was quantified using laboratory experiments for six different mixing ratios of soil matrix and rock. The SWRC for each mixture was obtained from water mass and water potential measurements. The resulting data for the studied mixtures yielded a family of SWRC indicating how the SWRC of the mixture is related to that of the individual media, i.e., soil and rock. A consistent model was also developed to describe the hydraulic properties of the mixture as a function of the individual properties of the rock and soil matrix. Key words: Soil hydraulic properties, rock content, binary mixture, experimental data.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85259", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85260" } }
{"authors":"Edna Rodríguez-Gaviria::Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Medellin Colegio Mayor de Antioquia--Veronica Botero-Fernandez::Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Medellin--", "title":"NH33B-1919: URBAN FLOOD RISK ASSESSMENT UNDER UNCERTAIN CONDITIONS AND SCARCE INFORMATION", "abstract":"Flood risk management in small urban areas in Colombia has a great degree of uncertainty due to the low availability and quality of data, the non-existent personnel qualified in the collection and processing of data, and the insufficient information to evaluate the risk and vulnerability. It is because of this that two methods are developed: one for the generation of flood threat maps for different return periods combining historical, geomorphological, and hydrological hydraulic methods assisted by remote sensors and SIG through the use of data acquired through field campaigns, official hydrological networks, orthophotos, multitemporal topographic maps, and ASTER, STRM, and LiDAR images. And another method in which categorical variables are established, linking local physical, social, economical, environmental and political-institutional factors that are explored through different media such as reports, news, databases, transects, interviews, community workshops, and surveys conducted at homes. Such variables were included within an analysis of multiple correspondence to conduct a descriptive study of the exposure, susceptibility, and capacity conditions and to create a vulnerability index that was spatially plotted spatially on maps. The uncertainty is reduced in the measure in which local knowledge is used as a source of information acquisition, of validation of what already exists, and of calibration of the proposed methods. This research was applied to the urban centers of Caucasia (Antioquia) and Plato (Magdalena), which have been historically affected by slow flooding of the Magdalena and Cauca river, it being especially useful in the selection of best alternatives for risk management, planning for development, and land use management, with the possibility of replicating it to benefit other municipalities that experience the same reality.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85260", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85261" } }
{"authors":"Raymond Sambrotto::Columbia Univ--", "title":"ED33E-07: Lamont-Doherty’s Secondary School Field Research Program: Institutionalizing outreach to secondary school students at a soft-money research institute", "abstract":"The Secondary School Field Research Program is a field and laboratory internship for high school students at the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory. Over the past 11 years it has grown into a significant program, engaging approximately 50 high school and college students each summer, most of them from ethnic and economic groups that are under-represented in the STEM fields. The internships are based on research-driven science questions on estuarine physics, chemistry, ecology and the paleo-environment. Field studies are linked to associated laboratory analyses whose results are reported by the students as a final project. For the past two years, we have focused on the transition to an institutional program, with sustainable funding and organizational structures. At a grant-driven institution whose mission is largely restricted to basic research, institutionalization has not been an easy task. To leverage scarce resources we have implemented a layered structure that relies on near-peer mentoring. So a typical research team might include a mix of new and more experienced high school students, a college student, a high school science teacher and a Lamont researcher as a mentor. Graduates of the program are employed to assist with administration. Knowledge and best practices diffuse through the organization in an organic, if not entirely structured, fashion. We have found that a key to long-term funding has been survival: as we have sustained a successful program and developed a model adapted to Lamont’s unique environment, we have attracted longer term core financing on which grant-driven extensions can be built. The result is a highly flexible program that is student-centered in the context of a broader research culture connecting our participants with the advantages of working at a premier soft-money research institution.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85261", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85262" } }
{"authors":"Ali Salha::Utah State University--David Stevens::Utah State University--", "title":"H13C-1561: Effectiveness of SWAT in characterizing the watershed hydrology in the snowy-mountainous Lower Bear Malad River (LBMR) watershed in Box Elder County, Utah", "abstract":"Distributed watershed models are essential for quantifying sediment and nutrient loads that originate from point and nonpoint sources. Such models are primary means towards generating pollutant estimates in ungaged watersheds and respond well at watershed scales by capturing the variability in soils, climatic conditions, land uses/covers and management conditions over extended periods of time. This effort evaluates the performance of the Soil and Water Assessment Tool (SWAT) model as a watershed level tool to investigate, manage, and characterize the transport and fate of nutrients in Lower Bear Malad River (LBMR) watershed (Subbasin HUC 16010204) in Utah. Water quality concerns have been documented and are primarily attributed to high phosphorus and total suspended sediment concentrations caused by agricultural and farming practices along with identified point sources (WWTPs). Input data such as Digital Elevation Model (DEM), land use/Land cover (LULC), soils, and climate data for 10 years (2000-2010) is utilized to quantify the LBMR streamflow. Such modeling is useful in developing the required water quality regulations such as Total Maximum Daily Loads (TMDL). Measured concentrations of nutrients were closely captured by simulated monthly nutrient concentrations based on the R2 and Nash- Sutcliffe fitness criteria. The model is expected to be able to identify contaminant non-point sources, identify areas of high pollution risk, locate optimal monitoring sites, and evaluate best management practices to cost-effectively reduce pollution and improve water quality as required by the LBMR watershed’s TMDL.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85262", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85264" } }
{"authors":"Eric Davis::Utah Valley University--Kim Nielsen::Utah Valley University--", "title":"ED31C-0913: Combining Undergraduate Student Curriculum, Research, and Outreach: High-altitude Balloon and Rockets", "abstract":"The Society of Physics Students chapter at Utah Valley University (UVU) recently established a high altitude balloon project to provide students with research opportunities. This highly successful program involves students not only from physics but also from other STEM fields and non-STEM subjects, and as such acts as a unique outreach program for the department of physics. Examples of experiments performed with the balloon project are: 3D-acceleration measurements, altitude/pressure/temperature measurements, ozone monitoring, bio-aerosol collection, and solar panel performance output. All these experiment are designed and build by groups of students either as part of research projects or through class participation as the projects link with the curriculum in several courses. Most recently, a group of UVU students have initiated the implementation of small rockets capable of carrying payloads to this high-altitude program. Both balloon and rocket platforms are fundamental in-situ measuring techniques for numerous geoscience subjects, and are arguably best illustrated by the NASA balloon and sounding rocket programs. In this presentation, we give an overview of the program and how it is 1) being implemented into the curriculum, 2) provide unique research opportunities for students, and 3) specific outreach activities.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85264", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85265" } }
{"authors":"Eric Posmentier::Dartmouth College--Naixin Fan::Dartmouth College--Leslie Sonder::Dartmouth College--Xiahong Feng::Dartmouth College--", "title":"PP11B-2232: A Model of Atmospheric Vapor Isotopes at Their Source: the Marine Boundary Layer", "abstract":"The stable isotopes of water vapor and precipitation are widely used for studying modern and past climates, but the framework for interpreting isotope variations remains incomplete. The most significant gap is a full description of vapor isotopes and transport in the marine boundary layer (MBL) connecting the sea surface and the free troposphere. Increasingly available vapor isotope measurements in the MBL highlight the need to fill this gap. We introduce the first moderate complexity, vertically resolved MBL model that incorporates several important processes, including 1) entrainment of subsided mid tropospheric air with original mixing ratio rE, 2) height-dependent vapor diffusivity that is purely molecular at the surface and increases linearly with turbulence to a maximum Kmax in the mid MBL, and 3) vertical velocity wa.. Furthermore, the model does not require specification of either humidity or isotope ratios above the laminar layer, or kinetic fractionation within it. It computes all of these values as well as evaporation rate, isotopic profiles and fluxes, while the isotope flux ratios are the only output from earlier evaporation models. Analytical solutions are found for the profiles of δD, δ18O, and d-excess in the MBL. Simulations coincide remarkably well with the region of the δD vs. δ18O plane populated by global marine observations. Numerical experiments create a family of straight lines in the δD vs. δ18O plane corresponding to different combinations of conditions. These “vapor lines” are mixing lines between isotopically enriched vapor above the laminar layer and depleted vapor in subsiding air. Their slope and/or extent are most strongly influenced by rE and Kmax, to a lesser extent by sea surface temperature (SST) and the fraction of subsided air in the MBL (α), and only slightly by other parameters. We show that these effects of rE, Kmax and SST on the δD vs. δ18O relationship result from their combined influence on (1) the thickness of the laminar layer, and (2) the relative amount of vapor from aloft. The new model strengthens the inference of changes in climate from temporal and spatial variations in MBL water vapor. The model also provides initial conditions for the Rayleigh process that and governs vapor along its trajectories from their origin at the top of the MBL to precipitation sites.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85265", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85266" } }
{"authors":"Neda Amiri::University of Calgary--Ann Lise Norman::University of Calgary--", "title":"A43G-0365: A natural abundance stable isotope tracer experiment to define SO2 oxidation pathways and their fractionation during heterogeneous oxidation", "abstract":"Sulfate aerosols have crucial direct and indirect effects on climate from radiative cooling to modifying clouds by formation of cloud condensation nuclei. Secondary sulfate aerosols are formed by oxidation of SO2 and subsequent nucleation and growth and the characteristics of primary aerosol sulfate can be modified by oxidation of SO2. There are several known oxidation pathways for SO2; gaseous phase OH oxidation and aqueous phase H2O2, O3 and transition metal oxides oxidation. The SO2 oxidation pathway affects the characteristics of the aerosols formed. Stable isotope techniques are useful in determining the oxidation pathway of SO2 due to unique fractionation patterns (Harris et al., 2012). However, there are still gaps in our understanding of the oxidation pathways and fractionations affecting SO2 and secondary sulfate. A tracer experiment to investigate the oxidation of SO2 and fractionation using size segregated aerosols in the presence of different compounds is described. Two high volume samplers situated to measure background sulfate upwind, and the results of a tracer experiment, downwind, is described. After sufficient size segregated aerosol sulfate has been collected, a source of SO2 with known isotopic composition is introduced to the second high volume sampler. Changes in the isotopic composition for size segregated aerosol sulfate in comparison to the first high volume sampler are investigated. The amount of fractionation during heterogeneous oxidation of SO2 on pre-existing aerosols is calculated using the concentrations and known isotopic composition and compared to data from laboratory and field experiments. The experiment is performed downwind of sources of organic compounds such as pine forests, and characterized using co-located canister samples, to determine the effects of SO2 oxidation on secondary aerosol sulfate.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85266", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85267" } }
{"authors":"Alyssa Marie De Los Reyes::California State University Fresno--Keith Putirka::California State University Fresno--Michael Clynne::USGS--Melissa Scruggs::California State University Fresno--Brent Jackson::University of Texas--", "title":"V43B-3126: Vapor Saturation as The Cause of Volcanic Eruptions at the Lassen Volcanic Center, California, as Inferred from Crystallization Pressures and Temperatures", "abstract":"The last three silicic eruptions at the Lassen Volcanic Center occurred at Lassen Peak (27 ka and 1915-17) and Chaos Crags (1103 yrs BP). Klemetti and Clynne (2014) showed that felsic eruptions at Lassen reflect remobilization of resident rhyodacitic crystal mush by intrusion of mafic magma. To better understand the rejuvenation and eruption triggering process, we calculate crystallization temperatures and pressures from clinopyroxene-liquid equilibria on mafic enclaves that provide our closest approach to the composition of mafic magmas delivered to the shallow system. Our goal is to examine whether and to what extent cooling and crystallization occur after recharge, which bears on whether recharge, mixing, or partial crystallization (and consequent vapor saturation) provide the trigger for eruption. We use results from the cpx-liq barometer (1.7 kbar) as input to calculate T for other phases (plagioclase, olivine and amphibole) found in mafic enclave samples. Cpx crystallizes at 1100-1150 oC and olivine precipitates at similar to slightly higher temperatures. Cpx and ol are followed by plagioclase (1000-1050 oC), amphibole (875-1000 oC), and Fe-Ti oxides (1030-1050 oC). These temperatures indicate that recharge magmas are incompletely crystallized as they enter the shallow reservoir of cooler (~725-750 oC, Quinn et al., 2013) felsic crystal mush, and that significant cooling of the mafic magma occurs during mixing and prior to eruption. Such cooling intervals indicate that recharge is not the proximal cause of eruption, but rather that vapor saturation, following a period of mixing and cooling, leads to increased magma overpressure that causes eruption. Interestingly, the Lassen Peak 27 ka volcanics (at 2.09 km3), have a greater volume than either of Chaos Crags (1.2 km3) and the 1915 (0.03 km3) eruption, but our results indicate that their thermal histories are similar. This suggests that while volumes of mafic recharge may control the degree of interaction with felsic crystal mush (e.g., Clynne, 1999), and eventually the volume of erupted magma, recharge volumes do not affect eruption triggering mechanisms. Clynne MA (1999) J. Petrol, 40: 105–132. Klemetti and Clynne, 2014, PLoS One (/12:e113157. doi10.1371/journal.pone0113157) Quinn et al., 2013, AGU Fall Annual Meeting V23C-2848", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85267", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85268" } }
{"authors":"Steven Brown::Sonoma Technology, Inc.--", "title":"A23P-07: Mitigating and Tracking Black Carbon Exposure at Schools in the Mountain View Corridor of Salt Lake City", "abstract":"Black carbon (BC) is a short lived climate forcer and is associated with human health effects. We measured BC inside and outside at four schools in Salt Lake City during two studies in 2011–2014. In addition, PM2.5 was measured indoor and outdoor at one school, and gaseous air toxics outdoor at one school. The schools are within 500 m of a planned major freeway, and two of them will adjoin the freeway. The objectives included determining the outdoor and indoor concentrations of BC, the likely sources of BC, and once the freeway is built, the change in ambient BC at the schools. We determined the current state of air quality outdoors at these schools, to provide baseline data for comparison when the major freeway is operational, and indoors as a baseline before installing improved filtration to reduce BC in classrooms. Using MATES IV cancer risk values, we found that diesel particulate matter, as indicated by ambient, outdoor BC measurements, was responsible for 84% of the cancer risk at the schools. The HVAC system was moderately effective at filtrating PM mass (73% reduction), but very poor at filtering BC (7%-34% reduction), indicating that air toxics risk is similar indoors and outdoors. Improved filtration devices could potentially mitigate this risk, and improved filtration systems have been recommended for the schools. Lastly, we used the difference in absorption at two Aethalometer channels to determine that the majority of BC (> 90%) during the spring through fall is from fossil fuel emissions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85268", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85270" } }
{"authors":"James Hannigan::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Louisa Emmons::NCAR--Eric Nussbaumer::NCAR--Mathias Palm::University of Bremen--Stephanie Conway::University of Toronto--", "title":"A23I-04: Multi-decadal NDACC Measurements of Trace Species in the Arctic Free Troposphere", "abstract":"To understand better the effects of changing emissions, possibly changing transport pathways and chemistry in a rapidly changing Arctic tropospheric environment, consistent observations of key species for a duration preceding and spanning our current time period are invaluable. Since the late 1990's observations have been taken in the Arctic at several NDACC sites (Network for the Detection of Atmospheric Composition Change). These FTIR (Fourier Transform Infra-Red) instruments that pass through a process of inter-comparison to maximize consistency of spectral data and retrievals, routinely acquire spectra for many species of import to both tropospheric and stratospheric transport and chemistry. We will focus on the time series of several species of varying lifetimes, and emission rates to investigate transport to the Arctic. These time series of species with shorter lifetimes will include C2H2, C2H6 and HCN. Those with longer lifetimes include CO, CH4, CCl2F2 and CCl4. The vertical sensitivity of the FTIR measurements will be described for each to show the levels in the atmosphere from which the information is derived. The annual cycles and changes in concentrations with time will be discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85270", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85271" } }
{"authors":"Michael Harris::College of Charleston--Monica Oliviera-Manna::College of Charleston UFSC Federal University of Santa Catarina--Christopher Bailey::College of William and Mary--David Marchetti::Western State College of Colorado--Andrea Brunelle::University of Utah--Mark Abbott::University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh Campus--Darren Larsen::University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh Campus--Joseph Stoner::Oregon State Univ--Eric Grimm::Illinois State Museum--Joe Donovan::West Virginia University--Lesleigh Anderson::USGS Colorado Water Science Center Denver--Mitchell Power::University of Utah--Vanessa Chavez::University of Utah--Vachel Carter::University of Utah--Isaac Hart::University of Utah--", "title":"PP12A-07: Fish Lake, Utah – shallow seismic investigation of a lake-filled high-altitude graben", "abstract":"Fish Lake formed in a portion of the 20-km x 2.5-km wide NE-SW trending graben within the High Plateaus of Utah, on the border between the Basin and Range to the west and the Canyon Lands east. This presentation focuses on the shallow seismic stratigraphic architecture of the lake. Marchetti et al. (this meeting) focuses details of a shallow core collected in 2014. With a lake surface at 2700m, avg. depth of 27m (max 37m), the lake is flanked NW by a 15° slope up to a formerly glaciated Hightop plateau (3545m) and is bound to the SE by a 30° NW facing slope off the Mytoge crest (3050m). The drainage basin is 74 km2 with ~75% of the catchment draining the Hightop from four distinct streams. Pelican Canyon (glaciated) and Doctor Canyon (unglaciated) provide most drainage into the basin, with Bowery and Twin creeks draining only the slope. These streams flow through organic-rich meadows at the edge of the lake. Only one small stream drains NW into the lake from the small Crater Lakes graben (2850m) off the Mytoge. Bathymetric surveys in the lake highlight a submerged moraine to the NE, a gently sloping bottom that reaches maximum depth off the steep wall to the SE, and small delta-form features off each of the creeks on the NW edge. Chirp seismic surveys (2-16 kHz) consistently penetrate the upper 40-m (up to ~55m). The oldest visible reflectors rise into the submerged moraine to the NE, ending in a complex set of truncated and discontinuous beds eluding to soft sediment push at the front of the glacier. Along the edge near the creeks to the NW, multiple sets of downlapping reflectors, gas pockets, and chaotic beds with lobate tops define what we interpret as deltaic deposition, possible lower lake levels with marsh systems, and slope failures. The majority of the lake is underlain by flat-lying reflectors that bound sedimentary packages spanning the entirety of the basin interior. The uppermost layers have recently been cored where seismic reflectors are continuous, providing a good age model from the modern lakefloor, through the loose Holocene sediments, into the denser Pleistocene deposits. The next steps in this research are deeper seismic surveys and coring.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85271", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85273" } }
{"authors":"Gail Atkinson::University of Western Ontario--David Eaton::University of Calgary--Hadi Ghofrani::University of Western Ontario--Dan Walker::British Columbia Oil and Gas Commission--Burns Cheadle::University of Western Ontario--Ryan Schultz::University of Alberta--Robert Shcherbakov::University of Western Ontario--Kristy Tiampo::University of Western Ontario--Yu Gu::University of Alberta--Rebecca Harrington::McGill University--Yajing Liu::McGill University--", "title":"S11C-07: The Relationship Between Seismicity and the Oil and Gas Industry in Western Alberta and Eastern B.C.", "abstract":"Significantly increased production of hydrocarbons in North America is being driven by the development of unconventional resources whose commercial viability, in many cases, depends upon massive subsurface injection of fluids. Although relatively uncommon, elevated pore pressure from fluid injection of any kind can induce earthquake activity by activating slip on a proximal fault. In the western Canada sedimentary basin (which follows the Rocky Mountain foothills region and straddles the border between Alberta and B.C.), we find that hydraulic fracture treatment, wherein fluids are injected under high pressure in long laterally-drilled wells in order to induce localized fracturing of a rock formation, is the primary triggering mechanism of induced seismicity. This contrasts with the central U.S., where most induced seismicity has been attributed to large-scale wastewater injection into deep disposal wells. Our findings are based on a comprehensive statistical analysis of seismicity at the M≥3 level since 1985, along with a complete well database for the region, containing information on many thousands of oil and gas wells. Since 2010, most of the regional earthquakes of M≥3 are correlated in both time and space with hydraulic fracturing. Monte Carlo simulations confirm that the observed correlations are extremely unlikely (<<1%) to have been obtained by chance. Improved understanding of regional variability in fault activation processes, accounting for operational and geological factors, will aid in the development and validation of predictive models for the time-dependent hazards from induced earthquakes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85273", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85274" } }
{"authors":"Thomas Bida::Lowell Observatory--Rosemary Killen::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--", "title":"P41F-01: Observations of the minor species Al, Fe and Ca+ in Mercury’s exosphere", "abstract":"We report here on the first observational evidence of Al and Fe in the exosphere of Mercury, based on measurements of 4-5-σ resolved emission lines of these metals made with Keck-1/HIRES. AlI emission was observed on two separate runs, in 2008 and 2013, with tangent column densities of 2.4 and 3.0e+07 Al atoms cm-2 at altitudes of 1300 and 1850 km (1.1 and 1.5 RM), respectively. FeI emission has been observed once, yielding a tangent column of 6.2e+08 cm-2 at an altitude of 950 km (1.4 RM) in 2009. We also present observations of 3.5-σ CaII emission features near Mercury’s equatorial anti-solar limb in 2011, from which a stringent column abundance upper limit of 4.0e+06 cm-2 is derived for the Ca ion. A simple model for zenith column abundances of the neutral species yields 2.0e+07 Al cm-2, and 8.2e+08 Fe cm-2. The observations appear to be consistent with production of these species by impact vaporization, with a large fraction of the Al ejecta in molecular form, and that for Fe in mixed atomic and molecular forms. The scale height of the Al gas is consistent with a kinetic temperature of 4800-8200 K while that of Fe is 5000-13000 K. The apparent high temperature and low density of the Al gas would suggest that it may be produced by dissociation of molecules. A large fraction of both Al and Fe appear to condense in a vapor cloud at low altitudes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85274", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85275" } }
{"authors":"Stephen Holtkamp::University of Alaska Fairbanks--", "title":"S51D-2737: Towards a Network Matched Filter Observatory for Alaska/Aleutian Volcano Monitoring and Research.", "abstract":"Network Matched Filtering (NMF, commonly referred to as template matching), is a procedure which utilizes waveforms recorded from a cataloged seismic event (the “template event”) to find additional seismic events by cross-correlating the template event with continuous seismic data over the time period of interest. NMF has been successfully used to populate seismic catalogs for a wide variety of seismic signals which are difficult to identify, such as tectonic low frequency earthquakes, early or triggered aftershocks, and small magnitude induced seismic sequences. NMF provides robust event detection of signals with signal to noise ratios near one, and the output of the filter is largely independent of unrelated seismic noise, making it an ideal technique for identifying events during noisy time periods, such as immediately following a large earthquake or during a volcanic eruption. We also show how NMF can be used over longer time periods, with dynamic seismic network status, to more robustly compare time periods with disparate network geometries. Here, we present efforts to develop processing infrastructure for semi-automated execution of the NMF technique applied to volcanoes in the state of Alaska. We present a series of case studies involving both monitored and unmonitored volcanoes. Given the large scope of this endeavor, we focus our preliminary efforts on cataloging deep long period (DLP) seismicity, as DLP’s have high scientific interest (as well as providing a reasonable benchmark), have been cataloged at many of Alaska’s volcanoes, and yet are rare enough to speed up code development and testing. At Redoubt, for example, we use NMF to develop a catalog of ~300 DLP’s from 2008 through July 2015. Most cataloged DLP’s and new matches from NMF occurred close in time to the 2009 eruption, but we find that DLP activity has continued through July 2015. At Kasatochi, an unmonitored volcano which erupted in 2008, we show that NMF is more effective at cataloging seismicity utilizing only two regional broadband stations (about 100 km distant) than traditional analysis utilizing the short period network on Great Sitkin (<50 km away). At Trident, we catalog all shallow seismicity in an attempt to determine if there is a seismic expression of the discharge of volcanic gasses (sulfur) in July of 2013.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85275", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85277" } }
{"authors":"Recep Cakir::Washington State Department of Natural Resources--Carrie Garrison-Laney::University of Washington Seattle Campus--Xianyu Meng::Washington State Department of Natural Resources--Quinn Butler::Washington State Department of Natural Resources--Timothy Walsh::WA State Dept of Natural Resources--", "title":"NS41B-1948: Using Ground Penetration Radar for Imaging and Mapping of Thin, Shallow Tsunami Deposits in Washington, Pacific Northwest United States", "abstract":"A tidal marsh at Discovery Bay, on the Strait of Juan de Fuca, has the longest record of tsunami deposition in Washington, with nine described tsunami deposits. One of the youngest continuous deposits Bed 1is likely from the 1700 A.D. M9+ Cascadia Earthquake, based on its stratigraphic position and radiocarbon age. Bed 1 is typically found at a depth of ~ 0.45 m, has a maximum thickness of 8 cm, and is composed grains of silt to fine sand. Ground Penetration Radar (GPR) is useful to study such tsunami deposits, because it can “see” characteristics of the deposits that could be missed in cores or outcrops. Tsunami deposits typically extend over wide areas. GPR imaging can trace a layer over a wide area in the subsurface of a tidal marsh. Correlation of layers between coring or outcrops is often difficult across distances in a marsh. GPR technology allows in situ correlation of potential tsunami deposits in the subsurface. We used GPR to map subsurface images of previously described tsunami deposits in the top 2 m at Discovery Bay. We used MALA 450 MHz antenna and recording unit, and ran the survey during the low tide time range (3-4 hours). After adjusting the soil velocity (dielectric constants) and scan parameters we ran various transects correlated the shallow soil cores in 0-1.5m of the soil column. Tsunami sand layer is relatively distinct among other layers on radargrams. Maximum penetration depth reached was about 2 meters and saltwater effect is dominant at 2 meters and greater depths. In addition to this success, there is also the potential to use GPR to“see” characteristic tsunami deposit features such as draping and infilling of low spots. This imaging could help guide locations to sample with strategic cores or pits. We think that our preliminary results are promising,and plan to use the GPR technology to investigate potential tsunami deposits inPuget Sound and other coastal areas of Washington.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85277", "section":"Near Surface Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85278" } }
{"authors":"Sayantani Karmakar::Portland State University--Chris Butenhoff::Portland State University--Andrew Rice::Portland State University--David Lofdahl::Eastern Oregon University--Aslam Khalil::Portland State Univ--", "title":"A33C-0174: Recent trends in global methane emissions inferred from 30-years of surface CH4 and δ13C-CH4 measurements", "abstract":"Methane (CH4) is the second most important greenhouse gas after carbon dioxide. Quantitative understanding of the global CH4 budget is important in order to predict future contributions of global warming and to develop effective strategies for its mitigation. After a decade-long period of decreasing growth rates, atmospheric CH4 concentrations have risen in recent years raising concerns about its long-term stability. Despite much study there is no clear consensus about the causes of this increase. Some bottom-up inventories suggest that fugitive emissions from the fossil fuel industry may be increasing though there are considerable uncertainties in these estimates due in part to the variable nature of this source. To better understand the changing budget of atmospheric CH4, we performed a time-dependent retrieval of CH4 fluxes spanning nearly 30 years using global surface and isotopic CH4 measurements. An earlier inversion from our group suggested that fugitive fossil fuel emissions increased from 2000-2008, contributing to the recent rise. Here we extend this study to year 2015 using the most recent NOAA Global Monitoring Division (GMD) CH4 measurements and available δ13C -CH4 data along with a higher resolution version of the chemical transport model GEOS-Chem (2ox2.5o). The higher resolution grid allowed us to extract more information from the observations due to the improved ability of the model to simulate CH4 at each station and the decreased need to aggregate neighboring stations. This in turn increased the error reduction between the a priori and posterior emissions leading to more accurate estimates of the retrieved fluxes and improved understanding of the drivers underlying the current atmospheric record.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85278", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85279" } }
{"authors":"Joanne Whittaker::University of Tasmania--Maria Seton::University of Sydney--Ashby Cooper::University of Tasmania--", "title":"PP33B-2306: Land Bridges and Oceanic Gateways: the Importance of Large Igneous Provinces in Reconstructing Paleobathymetry", "abstract":"Accurate reconstructions of global and regional paleobathymetry are important for understanding changing patterns of paleo-ocean circulation and climate over geological timescales. Large Igneous Provinces (LIPs) have erupted throughout the world’s oceans, creating important bathymetric expressions on the seafloor and temporally exposed land. Global plate tectonic reconstructions of mid-ocean ridges, LIPs, and plumes have demonstrated that the formation of LIPs repeatedly occur at specific ridge-plume interaction locations over periods of tens of millions of years. Due to the shallow depth of mid-ocean ridges relative to the abyssal plains, the formation of LIPs at these locations increases the likelihood of the creation of sub-aerial regions that exist for millions of years before subsiding. Here, we assess the time-varying size, shape, location and depth of LIPs globally and incorporate them into maps of predicted paleo-bathymetry. We focus on accurate estimation of the paleo-bathymetry of oceanic LIPs by taking into account the temporal plume swell that affects the wider region around each LIP, with a likely significant affect on the surface height of both onshore and offshore regions. We ground truth our estimations using a variety of marine data, particularly results from ocean drilling. Of particular interest is the present-day southern Indian Ocean (offshore eastern Antarctica) where the Bouvet, Marion and Kerguelen plumes interact with the Southwest Indian mid-ocean ridge. As West Gondwana broke apart, continental Antarctica slowly moved away from this stationary line of ridge-plume interactions, with the newly formed oceanic crust of the southern Indian and Atlantic Oceans overlying these locations instead. Thus, since the Jurassic parts of East Antarctica and the adjacent Atlantic and Indian oceans have been repeatedly affected by the formation of LIPs at ridge-plume interactions, and our results suggest the potential for landbridges or significant islands between Africa, India and Antarctica during the Cretaceous and Cenozoic.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85279", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85280" } }
{"authors":"Andreas Groth::University of California Los Angeles--Vincent Moron::Aix-Marseille University CEREGE--Andrew Robertson::Columbia University of New York--Dmitri Kondrashov::University of California Los Angeles--Michael Ghil::Ecole Normale Supérieure Paris University of California Los Angeles--", "title":"OS41A-1992: The Warming Hiatus, Natural Variability and Thermal Ocean Structure", "abstract":"Long before the recent concern with the warming hiatus, Ghil and Vautard (1991, Nature) stated at the end of their abstract that “The oscillatory components [in global temperature time series] have combined (peak-to-peak) amplitudes of 0.2°C, and therefore limit our ability to predict whether the inferred secular warming of 0.005°C/yr will continue.” Present capabilities of the advanced spectral methods introduced into the global warming problem by that paper permit us now to consider oscillatory aspects of natural variability in much greater detail. In a multivariate analysis of the upper-ocean thermal structure, we examine properties of the recent long-term changes and of the naturally occurring global-climate fluctuations on interannual-to-interdecadal time scales. M. Ghil and associates (Ghil and Vautard 1991; Plaut et al. 1995, Science; Ghil et al. 2002, Rev. Geophys.), among others, have argued that this natural variability has some regularity embedded into it. Although the existence of such regularity on the interannual time scale is fairly well established by now, evidence for similar regularity on decadal and interdecadal time scales is more difficult to establish, due to the shortness of instrumental temperature data. To identify spatio-temporal patterns, we rely on the method of multichannel singular spectrum analysis [M-SSA; see Ghil et al. (2002) for a review] and on its recent improvements that help separate distinct patterns (Groth and Ghil 2011, Phys. Rev. E; Groth and Ghil 2015, J. Climate). Results on the temperature field from the Simple Ocean Data Assimilation (SODA) reanalysis (Carton and Giese 2008, Mon. Wea. Rev.; Giese and Ray 2011, J. Geophys. Res.) will be shown and contrasted with results on the HadCRUT surface temperature dataset (Morice et al. 2012, J. Geophys. Res.). We will focus, in particular, on the robustness of the geographical distribution of long-term changes in both data sets and discuss the significance of superimposed natural regularities in the traditional context of red noise (Hasselmann 1976, Tellus A). Finally, we will discuss the extent to which these regularities could have contributed to the recent hiatus in the long-term changes, as predicted by Ghil and Vautard (1991).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85280", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85281" } }
{"authors":"Myeong-Jae Jeong::Gangneung-Wonju National University--Nai-Yung Hsu::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Jaehwa Lee::Earth System Science Interdisciplinary Center--Andrew Sayer::Universities Space Research Association Greenbelt--Corey Bettenhausen::Science Systems and Applications, Inc.--Jingfeng Huang::University of Maryland College Park--", "title":"A43A-0262: Characterization of smoke aerosols over the Indochina Peninsula from multi-platform satellite observations", "abstract":"Multi-faceted near-simultaneous observations from the sensors aboard multiple satellite platforms, so called the A-Train, are utilized to characterize the spatial distributions and the optical properties of smoke aerosols over the Indochina Peninsula. Observations from the A-Train sensors, especially, MODerate resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), Ozone Monitoring Instrument (OMI), and Cloud-Aerosol Lidar with Orthogonal Polarization (CALIOP), are synthesized to retrieve single-scattering albedo (SSA) and effective aerosol layer height (ALH) of BBS aerosols in the region. The retrieval algorithm extracts the absorption and height information about smoke aerosols, which is lumped into ultraviolet spectra at the top of the atmosphere, by taking the most reliable information contents that each satellite measurement can deliver. The results of retrieved SSA and ALH showed reasonable agreements with in-situ measurements, AEROsol Robotic NETwork (AERONET) data, and lidar-based observations. The uncertainty and sensitivity of the retrieval algorithm are also presented. The retrieved quantities are then used together with other satellite datasets to characterize the three-dimensional distributions of smoke aerosols over the Indochina Peninsular during the boreal spring time. Given the frequent horizontal collocations of smoke and clouds in the region, implication of smoke vertical distributions for long-range transports is also discussed. The results of this study are anticipated to advance our understanding on the climatic impacts of the smoke aerosols in the region.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85281", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85282" } }
{"authors":"Andrew Newell::North Carolina State University Raleigh--", "title":"GP43A-1242: Small-field Thermal Relaxation Rates for Single-domain Magnets", "abstract":"Any magnetic process involving hysteresis is affected by thermally driven transitions between magnetic states. The transition rates depend on the energy barriers, which are generally difficult to calculate. However, some simple results can be obtained for small magnetic fields. In a single-domain magnet with uniaxial anisotropy, a magnetic field at an angle to the easy axis makes the moments of the stable states and energy barrier states rotate; yet the effects of these rotations cancel out, leaving an expression that depends only on the zero-field states. Some of the cancellation occurs because, in general, there are two energy barriers, a fact that (to the presenter's knowledge) has been ignored in all previous calculations. In a small static field, the relaxation rate is the same as the zero-field rate to first order; and also to first order, the blocking temperature is equal to the unblocking temperature.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85282", "section":"Geomagnetism and Paleomagnetism"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85284" } }
{"authors":"Tetsuya Takeda::National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention--Keiji Kasahara::Association for the Development of Earthquake Prediction--Hiroki Hayashi::Shimane University--Susumu Abe::JGI, Inc.--Kazuhiko Goto::Kagoshima University--", "title":"S11A-2779: Relationship between Crustal Structure and Source Fault of 1997 Kagoshima Earthquake (M6.6), Japan, based on Relocated Hypocenters and Seismic Reflection Data", "abstract":"The 1997 Kagoshima earthquake (M6.6) occurred in southern Kyushu, Japan, subsequently involving the largest aftershock (M6.4) two months later. The mainshock focal mechanism shows a lateral fault type with a tensional axis of NW-SE direction. This area is located in the Hokusatsu-bend area (Murata,1987), which is a regional bending structure of the Shimanto Supergroup strata, and furthermore, in the junction area of the south-western Japan and the Ryukyu arcs. However, the relationship between the crustal structure and the source fault still remains unknown. Here we approach the analyses of the aftershock relocation and the seismic reflection data, and clarify the existence of characteristic structure to control the fault rupture. We have early aftershock data of the Kagoshima University and the catalog of NIED Hi-net, the nation-wide dense network established since 2000. Using a common velocity structure and a hypocenter determination method, we relocated the hypocenters of the both data. Also we have the data of the seismic survey, of which the survey line was designed in 2000, as crossing the near-vertical mainshock fault. We applied with the Multi Dip Reflection Surface method, resulting in clarifying the seismic image. The comparison with the relocated hypocenters and the fault rupture (Horikawa, 2001) demonstrated the aftershock gap within the large slip area, while its surrounding area shows high seismicity. Interestingly, the high seismicity aftershock area includes some seismicity gaps like a band in places. The seismic cross section shows two north dipping reflectors. The two reflectors become obscure around the source fault, where the aftershock seismicity is very low. This suggests that a north dipping layering structure may control seismic activity. It means that the subsurface structure related with the Hokusatsu-bend may influence on the rupture and its aftershock expansion.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85284", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85285" } }
{"authors":"Liyin Liang::University of California Riverside--Darrel Jenerette::University of California Riverside--", "title":"H21J-1542: Estimation of water flux in urban area using eddy covariance measurements in Riverside, Southern California", "abstract":"Micrometeorological methods can direct measure the sensible and latent heat flux in specific sites and provide robust estimates of the evaporative fraction (EF), which is the fraction of available surface energy contained in latent heat. Across a vegetation coverage gradient in urban area, an empirical relationship is expected between EF and vegetation coverage, which provides the opportunity to quantify regional water flux. Here we deployed three eddy covariance (EC) systems to quantify the relationship between EF and vegetation coverage. First, two continuous systems were deployed at an industrial area with very low vegetation cover and another located in the orange orchid in Riverside, CA, to quantify the temporal dynamic of EF for the endpoints. Second, a mobile EC system was deployed to quantify the spatial distribution of EF across a gradient of vegetation coverage, during the summer time in Riverside, CA. These data showed the EF in high vegetation cover is 31.16±3.99%, but at the lower vegetation cover site EF is only 16.48±5.40%, which about 2 times lower in EF than the area with high vegetation cover. These results derived from the EC measurements provide essential data to quantify the temporal and spatial water fluxes in urban area and are needed to better understand and manage urban water use in response to drought.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85285", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85286" } }
{"authors":"Xavier Mayali::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--Ty Samo::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--Daniel Nilson::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--Nestor Arandia Gorostidi::Oceanographic Center of Gijón--Laura alonso Saez::Fundación AZTI--Xose Moran::King Abdullah University of Science and Technology--Peter Weber::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--", "title":"B24C-04: Dual Label Stable Isotope Incubations Followed By Single Cell Nanosims Analyses To Investigate Microscale Phototroph-Heterotroph Interactions", "abstract":"In natural ecosystems such as lakes and oceans as well as human-engineered systems for sunlight-regulated biomass production (such as algal biofuel ponds), the interaction between autotrophic and heterotrophic processes are critical to determine whether such systems are net autotrophic or heterotrophic. Traditional methods to quantify autotrophy and heterotrophy include primary productivity and bacterial production measurements using radiolabeled substrates that quantify these processes on the bulk scale. To examine the microscale interactions between individual autotrophic and heterotrophic cells, we incubate mixed microbial assemblages with 13C-bicarbonate and 15N-leucine to label individual autotrophs and heterotrophs, respectively. We use nano imaging secondary ion mass spectrometry (with a Cameca NanoSIMS 50) to quantify the incorporation of the rare isotopes by single cells. We will present results from experiments examining the impact of warming on the exchange of C and N between algal and bacterial cells from the coastal Atlantic Ocean, which suggest that increased temperature may strengthen physical interactions and exchange. We will also present data from experiments examining the influence of attached bacteria on the cell-specific inorganic carbon fixation rates of biofuel-producing algal cultures which suggest that certain algal-attached bacterial groups grow faster than when free-living and influence algal growth. We conclude that the examination of individual cells uncover interactions that would be difficult, if not impossible, to investigate with bulk methods.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85286", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85287" } }
{"authors":"Hasan Bahcivan::SRI International Menlo Park--Jay Iuliano::California Polytechnic State University San Luis Obispo--", "title":"EP53C-1044: Ionospheric Scintillation Explorer (ISX)", "abstract":"NSF has recently selected Ionospheric Scintillation Explorer (ISX), a 3U Cubesat mission to explore the three-dimensional structure of scintillation-scale ionospheric irregularities associated with Equatorial Spread F (ESF). ISX is a collaborative effort between SRI International and Cal Poly. This project addresses the science question: To what distance along a flux tube does an irregularity of certain transverse-scale extend? It has been difficult to measure the magnetic field-alignment of scintillation-scale turbulent structures because of the difficulty of sampling a flux tube at multiple locations within a short time. This measurement is now possible due to the worldwide transition to DTV, which presents unique signals of opportunity for remote sensing of ionospheric irregularities from numerous vantage points. DTV spectra, in various formats, contain phase-stable, narrowband pilot carrier components that are transmitted simultaneously. A 4-channel radar receiver will simultaneously record up to 4 spatially separated transmissions from the ground. Correlations of amplitude and phase scintillation patterns corresponding to multiple points on the same flux tube will be a measure of the spatial extent of the structures along the magnetic field. A subset of geometries where two or more transmitters are aligned with the orbital path will be used to infer the temporal development of the structures. ISX has the following broad impact. Scintillation of space-based radio signals is a space weather problem that is intensively studied. ISX is a step toward a CubeSat constellation to monitor worldwide TEC variations and radio wave distortions on thousands of ionospheric paths. Furthermore, the rapid sampling along spacecraft orbits provides a unique dataset to deterministically reconstruct ionospheric irregularities at scintillation-scale resolution using diffraction radio tomography, a technique that enables prediction of scintillations at other radio frequencies, and potentially, mitigation of phase distortions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85287", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85288" } }
{"authors":"Richard Brereton::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--William McDowell::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Adam Wymore::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--", "title":"B51C-0434: Stream Ammonium Uptake Across Scales in Headwater Catchments of a Tropical Rainforest, Luquillo Mountains, Puerto Rico", "abstract":"Many tropical forest streams export high amounts of nitrogen relative to streams draining undisturbed watersheds of other biomes. With their low DOC concentrations and high rates of respiration, headwater streams in the Luquillo Mountains have been previously characterized as energy-limited, suggesting that NH4+ uptake is dominated not by N demand but by energy demand. In the Rio Icacos watershed, high concentrations of NH4+ (>1 mg N/L) are found in groundwater adjacent to the streams, making high inputs of NH4+ to the stream channel via groundwater seepage likely. Stream nutrient spiraling metrics can be used to quantify uptake and retention rates of specific nutrients, and can be measured by solute additions. Tracer Additions for Spiraling Curve Characterization (TASCC) is a recently developed method (Covino et al. 2010) for quantifying nutrient uptake with a single slug addition of nutrient and conservative tracer. Here we present NH4+ uptake metrics from TASCC additions in three Luquillo streams of different sizes, ranging from 2nd to 4th order: the Rio Icacos, a larger, 3rd order tributary and a smaller 2nd order tributary. Background NH4+ concentrations vary by up to an order of magnitude, with highest concentrations (27 μg N/L) found in the smaller tributary. Background DOC concentrations are uniformly low and show no difference between the three streams (500-600 μg C/L). The smaller tributary has the shortest uptake length (155 m) and highest uptake velocity (2.9 mm/min) of the three streams. Unexpectedly, the Rio Icacos has a higher uptake velocity (1.7 mm/min) than the larger tributary (1.0 mm/min), despite having an uptake length more than double (1400 m) that of the larger tributary (596 m). Overall, NH4+ uptake is substantial in all three streams and varies with background concentrations, not stream size.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85288", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85289" } }
{"authors":"Todd Levin::Argonne National Laboratory--Zhi Zhou::Argonne National Laboratory--", "title":"GC31E-1244: Impact of Water Availability on Regional Power System Operations – A Case Study of ERCOT", "abstract":"Impact of water availability on regional power system operations – A case study of ERCOT Thermal power plants are the largest single source of water withdrawals in the United States, mainly for cooling purposes. The amount of water that is required for cooling is highly dependent on a number of factors including the generation technologies being used, the temperature of the input water, and the total electricity load in the system. During summer months, many of these factors coincide to greatly increase the demand for water in a power system. Electricity demand typically reaches its annual peak when temperatures are high due to increased air conditioning loads. Ambient water temperatures also increase, meaning that greater quantities of water are required to provide the same amount of cooling at thermal generation plants. Finally, water availability is generally constrained due to seasonal effects and potential droughts. This raises concerns that water scarcity may lead to forced de-rating at some power plants during periods of peak demand, resulting in a more vulnerable and less reliable energy system. While increasing attention has recently been given to the inexorable link between water and energy, most commercial power models do not explicitly account for water use when optimizing system operation. We apply the AURORAxmp power modeling software to a case study analysis of the ERCOT power system to determine the water requirements of the system during periods of peak power demand. We then analyze water availability by location and time to identify potential supply shortages, which may reduce actual power generation availability. These data are fed back into the power systems model and specific generation units are de-rated as necessitated by water constraints. We then analyze these results to determine how the optimal generation mix, system reliability, and wholesale electricity prices may be affected by when the ERCOT power system is operated under water constraints.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85289", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85290" } }
{"authors":"David Fulker::OPeNDAP, Inc.--James Gallagher::OPeNDAP, Inc.--", "title":"PA51D-04: Sustainability of Open-Source Software Organizations as Underpinning for Sustainable Interoperability on Large Scales", "abstract":"OPeNDAP’s Hyrax data server is an open-source framework fostering interoperability via easily-deployed Web services. Compatible with solutions listed in the (PA001) session description—federation, rigid standards and brokering/mediation—the framework can support tight or loose coupling, even with dependence on community-contributed software. Hyrax is a Web-services framework with a middleware-like design and a handler-style architecture that together reduce the interoperability challenge (for N datatypes and M user contexts) to an O(N+M) problem, similar to brokering. Combined with an open-source ethos, this reduction makes Hyrax a community tool for gaining interoperability. E.g., in its response to the Big Earth Data Initiative (BEDI), NASA references OPeNDAP-based interoperability. Assuming its suitability, the question becomes: how sustainable is OPeNDAP, a small not-for-profit that produces open-source software, i.e., has no software-sales? In other words, if geoscience interoperability depends on OPeNDAP and similar organizations, are those entities in turn sustainable? Jim Collins (in Good to Great) highlights three questions that successful companies can answer (paraphrased here): What is your passion? Where is your world-class excellence? What drives your economic engine? We attempt to shed light on OPeNDAP sustainability by examining these. Passion: OPeNDAP has a focused passion for improving the effectiveness of scientific data sharing and use, as deeply-cooperative community endeavors. Excellence: OPeNDAP has few peers in remote, scientific data access. Skills include computer science with experience in data science, (operational, secure) Web services, and software design (for servers and clients, where the latter vary from Web pages to standalone apps and end-user programs). Economic Engine: OPeNDAP is an engineering services organization more than a product company, despite software being key to OPeNDAP’s reputation. In essence, provision of engineering expertise, via contracts and grants, is the economic engine. Hence sustainability, as needed to address global grand challenges in geoscience, depends on agencies’ and others’ abilities and willingness to offer grants and let contracts for continually upgrading open-source software from OPeNDAP and others.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85290", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85291" } }
{"authors":"Yoshiharu Hirayama::Hakusan Corporation--Yoichi Tanaka::Hakusan Corporation--Shingo Kuroda::Hakusan Corporation--Minoru Yoshida::Hakusan Corporation--", "title":"NH13D-1959: An original approach to fill the gap in the earthquake disaster experience - a proposal for ‘the archive of the quake experience’ -", "abstract":"People without severe disaster experience infallibly forget even the extraordinary one like 3.11 as time advances. Therefore, to improve the resilient society, an ingenious attempt to keep people’s memory of disaster not to fade away is necessary. Since 2011, we have been caring out earthquake disaster drills for residents of high-rise apartments, for schoolchildren, for citizens of the coastal area, etc. Using a portable earthquake simulator (1), the drill consists of three parts, the first: a short lecture explaining characteristic quakes expected for Japanese people to have in the future, the second: reliving experience of major earthquakes hit Japan since 1995, and the third: a short lecture for preparation that can be done at home and/or in an office. For the quake experience, although it is two dimensional movement, the real earthquake observation record is used to control the simulator to provide people to relive an experience of different kinds of earthquake including the long period motion of skyscrapers. Feedback of the drill is always positive because participants understand that the reliving the quake experience with proper lectures is one of the best method to communicate the past disasters to their family and to inherit them to the next generation. There are several kinds of archive for disaster as inheritance such as pictures, movies, documents, interviews, and so on. In addition to them, here we propose to construct ‘the archive of the quake experience’ which compiles observed data ready to relive with the simulator. We would like to show some movies of our quake drill in the presentation. Reference: (1) Kuroda, S. et al. (2012), “Development of portable earthquake simulator for enlightenment of disaster preparedness”, 15th World Conference on Earthquake Engineering 2012, Vol. 12, 9412-9420.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85291", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85292" } }
{"authors":"Maruti Mudunuru::University of Houston--Mohammad Shabouei::University of Houston--Kalyana Nakshatrala::University of Houston--", "title":"H21E-1417: A locally conservative non-negative finite element formulation for anisotropic advective-diffusive-reactive systems", "abstract":"Advection-diffusion-reaction (ADR) equations appear in various areas of life sciences, hydrogeological systems, and contaminant transport. Obtaining stable and accurate numerical solutions can be challenging as the underlying equations are coupled, nonlinear, and non-self-adjoint. Currently, there is neither a robust computational framework available nor a reliable commercial package known that can handle various complex situations. Herein, the objective of this poster presentation is to present a novel locally conservative non-negative finite element formulation that preserves the underlying physical and mathematical properties of a general linear transient anisotropic ADR equation. In continuous setting, governing equations for ADR systems possess various important properties. In general, all these properties are not inherited during finite difference, finite volume, and finite element discretizations. The objective of this poster presentation is two fold: First, we analyze whether the existing numerical formulations (such as SUPG and GLS) and commercial packages provide physically meaningful values for the concentration of the chemical species for various realistic benchmark problems. Furthermore, we also quantify the errors incurred in satisfying the local and global species balance for two popular chemical kinetics schemes: CDIMA (chlorine dioxide-iodine-malonic acid) and BZ (Belousov--Zhabotinsky). Based on these numerical simulations, we show that SUPG and GLS produce unphysical values for concentration of chemical species due to the violation of the non-negative constraint, contain spurious node-to-node oscillations, and have large errors in local and global species balance. Second, we proposed a novel finite element formulation to overcome the above difficulties. The proposed locally conservative non-negative computational framework based on low-order least-squares finite elements is able to preserve these underlying physical and mathematical properties. Several representative numerical examples are discussed to illustrate the importance of the proposed numerical formulations to accurately describe various aspects of mixing process in chaotic flows and to simulate transport in highly heterogeneous anisotropic media.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85292", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85293" } }
{"authors":"Michalea King::University of Delaware--", "title":"C51A-0686: Investigating the Sensitivity of Arctic Sea Ice to Variability in Early Summer Cloud Radiative Effect", "abstract":"Arctic sea ice is a highly sensitive and integral component of the climate system. The observed decline of sea ice in recent decades has affected Arctic ecosystems, transportation, and atmospheric processes. For these reasons, the development of skillful seasonal model predictions is essential, particularly for the early autumn when Arctic ice retreats to its minimum extent. However, a high degree of temporal and spatial variability has made sea ice predictions challenging. Arctic clouds become a large source of this variability by altering the amount of insolation and longwave radiation that is received at the surface. The goal of this research is to identify the predictive value of early summer cloud radiative effect (CRE) on autumnal sea ice extent. Absorbed solar radiation at the surface is most sensitive to cloud cover and composition during months of peak solar insolation, and may precondition the melting momentum of the sea ice in the subsequent months. Satellite data products, such as CERES, are used to investigate trends in cloud cover and radiative properties over the entire Arctic, as well as in several specific Arctic regions. This data, along with satellite sea ice concentration products, will be used to investigate the sensitivity of autumnal sea ice extent to changes in CRE throughout the melt season. The influence of relevant, larger-scale climate oscillations on atmospheric regimes and resulting cloud distribution will also be given consideration.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85293", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85294" } }
{"authors":"Roberto Real-Rangel::Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico--Adrián Pedrozo-Acuña::UNAM National Autonomous University of Mexico--", "title":"H51E-1423: Characterization of flash floods induced by tropical cyclones in Mexico", "abstract":"This study investigates the role of tropical cyclones (hurricanes, tropical storms and depressions) in the generation of flash floods in Mexico. For this, a severity assessment during several cyclonic events for selected catchments was estimated through the evaluation of a flash flood index recently proposed by Kim and Kim (2014). This classification is revised, considering the forcing and areal extent of torrential rainfall generated by the incidence of tropical cyclones on the studied catchments, enabling the further study of the flood regime in catchments located in tropical regions. The analysis incorporates characteristics of the flood hydrographs such as the hydrograph shape (rising curve gradient, magnitude of the peak discharge and flood response time) in order to identify flash-flood prone areas. Results show the Qp-A scaling relationship in catchments that were impacted by tropical cyclones, enabling their comparison against floods generated by other meteorological events (e.g. convective and orographic storms). Results will inform on how peak flows relationships are modified by cyclonic events and highlighting the contribution of cyclonic precipitation to flash-flooding susceptibility.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85294", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85295" } }
{"authors":"Nicola Ferralis::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--Emily Matys::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--Abigail Allwood::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Andrew Knoll::Harvard University--Roger Summons::MIT Lincoln Laboratory--", "title":"P31A-2042: Rapid and direct screening of H:C ratio in Archean kerogen via microRaman Spectroscopy", "abstract":"Rapid evaluation of the preservation of biosignatures in ancient kerogens is essential for the evaluation of the usability of Earth analogues as proxies of Martian geological materials. No single, non-destructive and non-invasive technique currently exists to rapidly determine such state of preservation of the organic matter in relation to its geological and mineral environment. Due to its non-invasive nature, microRaman spectroscopy is emerging as a candidate technique for the qualitative determination maturity of organic matter, by correlating Raman spectral features and aromatic carbon cluster size. Here we will present a novel quantitative method in which before-neglected Raman spectral features are correlated directly and with excellent accuracy with the H:C ratio. In addition to providing a chemical justification of the found direct correlation, we will show its applicability and predictive capabilities in evaluating H:C in Archean kerogens. This novel method opens new opportunities for the use of Raman spectroscopy and mapping. This includes the non-invasively determination of kerogen preservation and microscale chemical diversity within a particular Earth analogue, to be potentially extended to evaluate Raman spectra acquired directly on Mars.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85295", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85296" } }
{"authors":"Christopher Cully::University of Calgary--", "title":"SM14C-04: Quantifying Energetic Particle Precipitation using the Array for Broadband Observations of VLF/ELF Emissions (ABOVE)", "abstract":"The Array for Broadband Observations of VLF/ELF Emissions (ABOVE) is a network of instruments deployed across Western Canada to monitor electromagnetic emissions from 200 Hz to 75 kHz. By observing the amplitude and phase of artificial ground-based transmitters in this band, we monitor changes in lower D layer ionization caused by energetic particle precipitation. We discuss numerical modeling and sensitivity analyses that enable us to use ABOVE data to quantify energetic particle precipitation over Western Canada. We then apply this technique to precipitation events, comparing our preliminary results with in-situ and ground-based observations. We conclude that ABOVE offers a large-scale perspective on the problem of acceleration and loss of radiation belt particles that complements the detailed in-situ measurements from the Van Allen Probes, Themis, and other satellite missions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85296", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85297" } }
{"authors":"Adam Wade::Fugro Consultants, Inc. Walnut Creek--Ozgur Kozaci::Fugro Consultants, Inc. Walnut Creek--Christopher Hitchcock::InfraTerra--Graham Konieczny::CGG--Doug Garrie::CGG--", "title":"NH43A-1866: Integrated Geohazard Screening Using Remote Sensing, Including Satellite and Helicopter Based Imagery, LiDAR, and Geophysics, in Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan, Central Asia", "abstract":"We performed a detailed geohazard investigation of a 5 km-wide, 650km-long corridor through Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan, Central Asia. The study area includes the Rasht and Alai valleys at the boundary between the Pamir Mountains and the Alai Range of the southern Tien Shan. Ongoing collision between the India and Eurasia plates has resulted in the Tien Shan orogenic belt and the Pamir Mountains. Thus the study area is one of the most seismically active regions in the world. Rapid uplift, erosion, and steep slopes give rise to widespread landsliding and massive rock slope failures in both the Pamir and Tien Shan Mountains. Our integrated data acquisition and interpretation plan used airborne and remote sensing methods including satellite based DEMs and high resolution imagery, LiDAR, aerial photography, and helicopter based electromagnetic resistivity (HEM). Analysis of these data sets allowed us to delineate potential geohazards through surficial geologic mapping. Initial desktop geohazard screening included 1:50,000-scale mapping for potential faults, landslides, and liquefiable deposits, which included traffic light-style susceptibility maps for route refinement and hazard mitigation. As part of detailed investigations, continuous HEM data was collected and processed at a spatial sampling interval of approximately 3m. Apparent resistivity was calculated for each of the five operating frequencies over the entire survey area. For the purposes of this study, resistivity values at 10 m and 20 m depths were sliced from the interpolated 3D Differential Resistivity model for use in the analysis. Using GIS, we compared these results with mapped Quaternary units and found good correlation between resistivity contrasts and the boundaries of mapped surficial units. With this confidence, the HEM measurements were further analyzed to identify subsurface features and to develop a 3D geologic model. Based on this analysis we provided a framework for an optimized geotechnical borehole program which can maximize the informational value of each borehole site compared to a traditional evenly spaced layout.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85297", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85298" } }
{"authors":"Alex Teng::California Institute of Technology--John Crounse::California Institute of Technology--Paul Wennberg::California Institute of Technology--", "title":"A13G-04: Isoprene peroxy radical dynamics: constraints from laboratory studies", "abstract":"We report experimental measurements of the oxidation products of isoprene in the laboratory using gas chromatography coupled to CF3O- chemical ionization mass spectrometry. This technique provides a wealth of new data on the isomer distributions of nitrates and hydroperoxides formed from the oxidation of isoprene. The isomer distributions and stable product yields provide key constraints on the rates of interconversion and isomerization of isoprene peroxy radicals. We show that the isomer distribution of products formed at short peroxy radical lifetimes often found in laboratory studies differ from the isomer distribution formed at longer, atmospherically relevant peroxy radical lifetimes. The implications for atmospheric chemistry models and global oxidant budgets will also be discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85298", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85299" } }
{"authors":"David Doughty::Army Research Laboratory--Steven Hill::Army Research Laboratory--", "title":"A41A-0038: Laboratory and Ambient Studies Using an Automated Semi-Continuous Single-Particle Aerosol Raman Spectrometer", "abstract":"Single-particle Raman spectra can yield extensive information about in-situ ambient particulate composition. However, Raman spectral measurements of individual aerosol particles typically require collection of samples in the field followed by offline Raman spectral measurements in a laboratory. The process requires considerable operator time. We report results obtained with an automated, single-particle Aerosol Raman Spectrometer built by Battelle, which is the core of Battelle’s Resource Effective Bioidentification System (REBS). This instrument collects aerosol particles onto a metallized polymer tape and simultaneously measures Raman spectra of particles obtained during the previous collection period. At the end of each collection period (typically 15 minutes), the tape is advanced and the next collection and measurement period is begun. In this way, particles are semi-continuously sampled and their Raman spectra are measured. We show laboratory data from different sizes of polystyrene latex spheres. We also show results from calcium sulfate particles, vehicular emission soot, and other particles. We discuss the influence of imaging time on the quality of the Raman spectra measured and on the ability of the instrument to resolve aerosol particles. Finally, we present results from an outdoor sampling period during the summer of 2015 where the instrument ran unattended for more than one week collecting particles and measuring their Raman spectra. We suggest that the routine use of such an automated particle-sampling instrument should increase our understanding of inorganic and organic aerosols including biological aerosols and sources and fates of these particles.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85299", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85300" } }
{"authors":"J Arnold::U.S. Army Corps of Engineers--Martyn Clark::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Ethan Gutmann::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Andrew Wood::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Andrew Newman::University Corporation for Atmospheric Research--Roy Rasmussen::University Corporation for Atmospheric Research--Thomas Giambelluca::University of Hawaii at Manoa--Glen Liston::Colorado State Univ--Andrew Monaghan::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Keith Musselman::National Center for Atmospheric Research--", "title":"GC53B-1207: New Tools and Data to Understand and Adapt to Hydroclimatic Variability and Change in Alaska and Hawaii", "abstract":"The US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) Climate Preparedness and Resilience Program has long been a member of the team developing and maintaining the archive of downscaled climatologies and hydrologies for historical and future conditions distributed from the Green Data Oasis site at the Lawrence Livermore National Lab. These products have been created and served out publically with the hope of enhancing decision-making capabilities and potentially improving the use of climate change information in water-resource planning and management. To date, all this work – used extensively to compute climate change threats and water-resource vulnerabilities – has been done for the contiguous U.S. (CONUS); these and most other tools and datasets produced by others have not been primarily concerned with the unique hydrometeorological problems in Alaska and Hawaii. However, the different hydroclimatic regions of both those states are especially sensitive to specific climate change threats made more difficult to characterize by the intense spatial climatic gradients tracked with sparse station networks there and the dominance of distinctive hydrologic processes relatively rare in the CONUS. Examples of those processes include glaciers and permafrost in Alaska; and volcanic subsurface hydrogeology, intense tropical rainfall, and high rates of evapotranspiration in Hawaii, to name but a few. To address these knowledge and capability gaps for these regions outside the CONUS, USACE and its partners are now developing new tools and datasets of current and projected future climatologies and hydrologies to provide enhanced streamflow simulations and support both climate risk assessments and climate adaptation strategies in Alaska and Hawaii. This presentation will focus on our early stage analysis of historical hydroclimate variability in Alaska and Hawaii using the Weather Research and Forecast (WRF) model simulations and probabilistic interpolation of local gauge data in support of future new streamflow modeling. We will conclude with discussion of the ongoing and future research planned to better characterize and understand the sensitivity of the terrestrial component of the water cycle in Hawaii and Alaska to climate variability and change, and how this work can prepare for work in other similarly unique regions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85300", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85301" } }
{"authors":"Xiang Li::Carnegie Mellon University--Mark Omara::Carnegie Mellon University--Melissa Sullivan::Carnegie Mellon University--R Subramanian::Carnegie Mellon University--Allen Robinson::Carnegie Mellon University--Albert Presto::Carnegie Mellon University--", "title":"A11M-0251: Volatile Organic Compound Emissions from Natural Gas Facilities in the Denver-Julesburg Basin, the Uintah Basin and the Marcellus Shale", "abstract":"Natural gas has been widely considered as a “bridge” fuel in the future. Because of the rapid advancement of horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing techniques, the production of crude oil and natural gas in US increased dramatically in recent years; and currently natural gas contributes to about 25% of total US energy consumption. Recent studies suggest that shale gas extraction facilities may emit Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs), which could contribute to the formation of ozone and affect regional air quality, public health and climate change. In this study we visited 37 natural gas facilities in Denver-Julesburg and Uintah Basins from March to May, 2015. VOCs and methane concentrations were measured downwind of individual facilities with our mobile lab. In total 13 VOCs, including benzene and toluene, were measured by a SRI 8610C Gas Chromatograph. Similar measurements will be conducted in the Marcellus Shale in late August 2015. Preliminary results show that VOC emissions from individual shale gas facilities are variable, which suggests that a single VOC profile may not characterize all natural gas production facilities, though there may be some common characteristics. Measured VOC concentrations will be normalized to concurrently-measured methane emissions, and coupled with methane emission rates measured at these facilities, used to obtain VOC emission factors from natural gas production. This presentation will also compare VOC emission rates from the Marcellus shale with that from the Denver-Julesburg and Uintah basins.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85301", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85302" } }
{"authors":"Jongho Park::Kangwon National University--Sinkyu Kang::Kangwon National University--", "title":"GC13B-1141: On the relations between land-surface Water Use Efficiency and Asian dust storms in the Northeast Asia", "abstract":"Asian dust storm is one of major environmental issures in the Northeast Asia. The dust storm occurrence is typically influenced by both atmospheric (i.e. pressure, wind speed, precipitation, etc.) and land-surface conditions (i.e. vegetation cover and vitality, soil dryness, etc). Severe water stess in arid and semi-arid regions can resulted in reduction of vegetation cover fraction ultimately. Plant physiological change might however precede the vegetation structural change by regulating leaf stomatal resistance. In this study, we tested whether plant physiological index can be used for early indicator of plant recession causing dust storm increase. For the purpose, satellite-based eco-physiological variables such as gross primary production (GPP), evapotranspiration (ET), and water use efficiency (WUE) were prepared and then, compared their spatial and temporal variability with Synop dust storm data for the Northeast Asia. In results, the asian dust storms occurrence decreased in early 2000s but again increased, especially, in eastern mongolia during late 2000s. Our tentative result indicates that this region was appeared consistently low water use efficiency result during the period of late 2000s. In this study, the relations between WUE and dust sorm were interpreted and discussed as a tool for early indicator of land degradation of arid and semi-arid grasslands.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85302", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85303" } }
{"authors":"Timothy Anderson::University of Montana--Kelsey Jencso::University of Montana--Zachary Hoylman::University of Montana--Jia Hu::Montana State University--", "title":"H23G-1660: Affordable Open-Source Data Loggers for Distributed Measurements of Sap-Flux, Stem Growth, Relative Humidity, Temperature, and Soil Water Content", "abstract":"Characterizing the mechanisms that lead to differences in forest ecosystem productivity across complex terrain remains a challenge. This difficulty can be partially attributed to the cost of installing networks of proprietary data loggers that monitor differences in the biophysical factors contributing to tree growth. Here, we describe the development and initial application of a network of open source data loggers. These data loggers are based on the Arduino platform, but were refined into a custom printed circuit board (PCB). This reduced the cost and complexity of the data loggers, which made them cheap to reproduce and reliable enough to withstand the harsh environmental conditions experienced in Ecohydrology studies. We demonstrate the utility of these loggers for high frequency, spatially-distributed measurements of sap-flux, stem growth, relative humidity, temperature, and soil water content across 36 landscape positions in the Lubrecht Experimental Forest, MT, USA. This new data logging technology made it possible to develop a spatially distributed monitoring network within the constraints of our research budget and may provide new insights into factors affecting forest productivity across complex terrain.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85303", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85305" } }
{"authors":"Steven Crum::University of California Riverside--Darrel Jenerette::University of California Riverside--", "title":"H21J-1543: Impacts of land use and land cover on surface and air temperature in urban landscapes", "abstract":"Accelerating urbanization affects regional climate as the result of changing land cover and land use (LCLU). Urban land cover composition may provide valuable insight into relationships among urbanization, air, and land-surface temperature (Ta and LST, respectively). Climate may alter these relationships, where hotter climates experience larger LULC effects. To address these hypotheses we examined links between Ta, LST, LCLU, and vegetation across an urban coastal to desert climate gradient in southern California, USA. Using surface temperature radiometers, continuously measuring LST on standardized asphalt, concrete, and turf grass surfaces across the climate gradient, we found a 7.2°C and 4.6°C temperature decrease from asphalt to vegetated cover in the coast and desert, respectively. There is 131% more temporal variation in asphalt than turf grass surfaces, but 37% less temporal variation in concrete than turf grass. For concrete and turf grass surfaces, temporal variation in temperature increased from coast to desert. Using ground-based thermal imagery, measuring LST for 24 h sequences over citrus orchard and industrial use locations, we found a 14.5°C temperature decrease from industrial to orchard land use types (38.4°C and 23.9°C, respectively). Additionally, industrial land use types have 209% more spatial variation than orchard (CV=0.20 and 0.09, respectively). Using a network of 300 Ta (iButton) sensors mounted in city street trees throughout the region and hyperspectral imagery data we found urban vegetation greenness, measured using the normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI), was negatively correlated to Ta at night across the climate gradient. Contrasting previous findings, the closest coupling between NDVI and Ta is at the coast from 0000 h to 0800 h (highest r2 = 0.6, P < 0.05) while relationships at the desert are weaker (highest r2 = 0.38, P < 0.05). These findings indicate that vegetation cover in urbanized regions of southern California, USA decrease Ta and LST and spatial variation in LST, while built surfaces and land uses have the opposite effect. Furthermore these relationships are regulated by regional climate patterns, with decreases in Ta and LST being strongest in the coastal sub-region.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85305", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85307" } }
{"authors":"Dominique Garello::Arizona State University--Alan Deino::Berkeley Geochronology Center--Christopher Campisano::Arizona State University--John Kingston::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Ramon Arrowsmith::Arizona State University--Andrew Hill::Yale University--", "title":"PP13C-2307: Tephrochronology of the East African Baringo-Tugen Hills Cores: Hominin Sites and Paleolakes Drilling Project (HSPDP) ", "abstract":"The Baringo/Tugen Hills basin (BTB) in central Kenya is one of five Hominin Sites and Paleolakes Drilling Project (HSPDP) localities targeting lacustrine sediments associated with key fossil hominin sites. The fossiliferous Plio-Pliestocene Chemeron Formation, within the BTB, contains geochemically analyzed outcrop tephras, 8 of which have 40Ar/39Ar dates of 3.2-2.35Ma. Tephras have been crucial in developing chronologies in human evolution, paleontology, archaeology, and rift basin development. The HSPDP paleo-lake cores provide a high resolution and continuous record of sedimentation, as well as additional tephras not found in outcrop. For BTB, approximately 20 vitric tephras have been logged in the cores, including several previously unobserved tephras, providing a more complete record of volcanic activity. Major element geochemical analyses of the BTB tephras collected from the cores are critical for establishing chronostratigraphic links to the outcrop stratigraphy of the Chemeron Formation, as well as correlations outside of BTB. The Chemeron Formation, composed of alternating fluvial and lacustrine sediments, is associated with the onset and intensification of the Cenozoic Northern Hemisphere glaciation and encompasses the period of great hominin diversification of Paranthropus and Homo, as well as the earliest evidence for stone toolmaking. Within the Chemeron stratigraphy, there are sequences of diatomites that record a 23kyr-processional periodicity indicating a dominant climatic forcing. By correlating the BTB tephras, and thereby the BTB climate-forced lacustrine cycles, with other East African rift basins’ stratigraphy, we can determine if this climatic wet/dry pattern observed at BTB had occurred in other East African rift basins. This knowledge can help in understanding the influence of climate and tectonics on the evolution of hominins during the Plio-Pleistocene.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85307", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85308" } }
{"authors":"Donald Thomas::CSAV--Darcy Bevens::CSAV--", "title":"PA43C-2207: A Broadly-Based Training Program in Volcano Hazards Monitoring at the Center for the Study of Active Volcanoes", "abstract":"The Center for the Study of Active Volcanoes, in cooperation with the USGS Volcano Hazards Program at HVO and CVO, offers a broadly based volcano hazards training program targeted toward scientists and technicians from developing nations. The program has been offered for 25 years and provides a hands-on introduction to a broad suite of volcano monitoring techniques, rather than detailed training with just one. The course content has evolved over the life of the program as the needs of the trainees have changed: initially emphasizing very basic monitoring techniques (e.g. precise leveling, interpretation of seismic drum records, etc.) but, as the level of sophistication of the trainees has increased, training in more advanced technologies has been added. Currently, topics of primary emphasis have included volcano seismology and seismic networks; acquisition and modeling of geodetic data; methods of analysis and monitoring of gas geochemistry; interpretation of volcanic deposits and landforms; training in LAHARZ, GIS mapping of lahar risks; and response to and management of volcanic crises. The course also provides training on public outreach, based on CSAV’s Hawaii-specific hazards outreach programs, and volcano preparedness and interactions with the media during volcanic crises. It is an intensive eight week course with instruction and field activities underway 6 days per week; it is now offered in two locations, Hawaii Island, for six weeks, and the Cascades volcanoes of the Pacific Northwest, for two weeks, to enable trainees to experience field conditions in both basaltic and continental volcanic environments. The survival of the program for more than two decades demonstrates that a need for such training exists and there has been interaction and contribution to the program by the research community, however broader engagement with the latter continues to present challenges. Some of the reasons for this will be discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85308", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85309" } }
{"authors":"Erin Wood::University of Colorado at Boulder--", "title":"ED51A-0804: Using spectroscopy and interactive games to teach Solar System science: A decade of NASA's Project SPECTRA!", "abstract":"NASA's Project SPECTRA! has been in existance for nearly a decade. It highlights mission data and uses interactive games to engage students in middle and high school grades. Students learn about the electromagnetic spectrum and how we use this information to glean information about Solar System objects, and their atmospheres and climates. The program uses data from Cassini, Mars orbiters and rovers (most recently MAVEN), Venus Express, and several Earth orbiters to bring concepts of planetary comparison into focus. Using both traditional paper and pencil lessons and Flash and app based games, students are asked to conduct open ended research, make sense of the data they are presented with, and make scientific observations and hypothesis based upon their explorations. This talk will demonstrate how games are used to engage students in this process. Project SPECTRA! is a NASA product available through NASAWavelength.org, and is aligned to the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85309", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85310" } }
{"authors":"Dominique Albina::LAMIA, Université des Antilles--", "title":"H51H-1489: Modeling of the mineral contribution of dust to PM10 directly from the measurements of VIIRS Aerosol Optical Thickness", "abstract":"Northern Africa is well known as the largest producing region of dust, which is transported across the Atlantic to the Caribbean, under specific weather conditions. Saharan dust was observed, over the Caribbean Basin, to try to determine the roles they may play in human health, and in the fertilization of Amazon Forest. Scientists have not only used the satellite sensors MODIS and VIIRS to measure the volume of dust that makes this trans-Atlantic journey, but also the AERONET network of photometers, and PM10 Suspended Particulate Matter. We have successfully compared and shown a high correlation between the measurements from VIIRS aerosol optical thickness (AOT) and PM10 so that to be able to determine an accurate modeling of the mineral contribution of dust to PM10 directly from the measurements of VIIRS. The aim of this work is to show that it is possible to accurately forecast the daily mean concentration of PM10 using linear regression models. In this way, countries of the Caribbean region which cannot afford Particle Sensor for Pm10 will be able to have a precise idea of the PM10 daily forecast upon there region.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85310", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85311" } }
{"authors":"Serina Diniega::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Carol Raymond::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Thomas Prettyman::Planetary Science Institute--", "title":"P11B-2101: Pandora – Discovering the origin of the moons of Mars (a proposed Discovery mission)", "abstract":"After decades of intensive exploration of Mars, fundamental questions about the origin and evolution of the martian moons, Phobos and Deimos, remain unanswered. Their spectral characteristics are similar to C- or D-class asteroids, suggesting that they may have originated in the asteroid belt or outer solar system. Perhaps these ancient objects were captured separately, or maybe they are the fragments of a captured asteroid disrupted by impact. Various lines of evidence hint at other possibilities: one alternative is co-formation with Mars, in which case the moons contain primitive martian materials. Another is that they are re-accreted ejecta from a giant impact and contain material from the early martian crust. The Pandora mission, proposed in response to the 2014 NASA Discovery Announcement of Opportunity, will acquire new information needed to determine the provenance of the moons of Mars. Pandora will travel to and successively orbit Phobos and Deimos to map their chemical and mineral composition and further refine their shape and gravity. Geochemical data, acquired by nuclear- and infrared-spectroscopy, can distinguish between key origin hypotheses. High resolution imaging data will enable detailed geologic mapping and crater counting to determine the timing of major events and stratigraphy. Data acquired will be used to determine the nature of and relationship between ` red`  and ` blue`  units on Phobos, and determine how Phobos and Deimos are related. After identifying material representative of each moons’ bulk composition, analysis of the mineralogical and elemental composition of this material will allow discrimination between the formation hypotheses for each moon. The information acquired by Pandora can then be compared with similar data sets for other solar system bodies and from meteorite studies. Understanding the formation of the martian moons within this larger context will yield a better understanding of processes acting in the early solar system, focusing in particular on Mars’ accretionary environment.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85311", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85312" } }
{"authors":"Julie Witcover::University of California - Davis--", "title":"GC33A-1272: Trends and Issues in California’s Low Carbon Fuel Standard – Learning from Response to Existing Climate Policy", "abstract":"Debate over lower greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from transportation has included heated discussion about appropriate policies and their cost and feasibility. One prominent policy mechanism, a carbon intensity standard, rates transport fuels based on analysis of lifecycle GHG emissions, and targets lower fuel pool carbon intensity through a market mechanism that uses a system of tradable, bankable credits and deficits. California instituted such a policy -- the Low Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS) – in 2010, which targets a 10% carbon intensity (CI) reduction by 2020. The program rolled out amid concerns over slow development of new fuels expected to be very low carbon (such as cellulosic) and has faced court challenges that added considerable policy uncertainty. Since the program’s start, state transport energy mix has shifted modestly but noticeably. Looking ahead, emerging issues for the program include amendments and re-adoption in response to a court ruling, potential interaction with California’s multi-sector cap on carbon emissions (which started covering transport fuels in 2015), and impacts from similar CI standards in other jurisdictions. This study provides an analysis of fuel mix changes since the LCFS was implemented in 2011, and a discussion of emerging issues focusing on policy interaction. Descriptive statistics on alternative fuel use, available fuel pathways, and CI ratings are presented based on data from the California Air Resources Board (which runs the program). They document a shift towards more alternative fuels in a more diverse mix, with lower average CI ratings for most alternative fuel types. Financial incentives for various fuels are compared under the LCFS and the US federal Renewable Fuel Standard; disincentives from conceptually different carbon pricing schemes under the LCFS and the Cap-and-Trade are also outlined. The results provide important information on response to an existing market-based policy mechanism for addressing GHG emissions in transportation, as other jurisdictions weigh similar climate policies and debate mechanisms and costs and California announced an ambitious target of halving petroleum use by 2030.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85312", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85313" } }
{"authors":"Eunyoung Kim::Seoul National University--Douglas Toomey::University of Oregon--Emilie Hooft::University of Oregon--William Wilcock::University of Washington Seattle Campus--Robert Weekly::Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology--Sang-Mook Lee::Seoul National University--Younghee Kim::Seoul National University--", "title":"V21A-3024: Porosity estimates of the upper crust in the Endeavour segment of the Juan de Fuca Ridge", "abstract":"We estimate upper crustal porosity variations using the differential effective medium (DEM) theory to interpret the observed seismic velocity variations for the Endeavour segment of the Juan de Fuca Ridge, an intermediate spreading center [Weekly et al., 2014]. We use six P-wave vertical velocity profiles averaged within 5 km × 10 km areas to estimate the porosity at depths from 0.4 km to 2 km. The profile regions cover on-axis, east and west flanks of the central Endeavour segment and three regions of the segment ends including the Endeavour-West Valley (E-WV) and the Cobb overlapping spreading centers (OSCs) and the relict Middle Valley. At the segment center, our calculated porosities on-axis and on the east and west flanks agree well with the apparent bulk porosities measured in Hole 504B at intermediate-spreading Costa Rica Rift [Becker, 1990] and decrease from 5-15% to 2-7% from 0.5 km to 1 km depth and seal by 2 km depth. At all depths, our calculated porosities on the east and west flanks are lower than those on-axis by ~1.3-3%. This indicates the infilling of cracks by mineral precipitation associated with near-axis hydrothermal circulation [Newman et al., 2011]. At the segment ends, upper crustal velocities are lower than those in the segment center at depths < 2 km. These lower velocities are attributed to higher porosities (10-20% at 0.4 km decreasing to 3-6% at 2 km depth). This may indicate that fracturing in the OSCs strongly affects porosity at shallow depths. Between 0.7 km and 1 km, porosities estimated in all regions using pore aspect ratios of 0.05, 0.1 and 0.2 are higher than those from Hole 504B indicating that the aspect ratio of cracks may be smaller than 0.05. There also appears to be a spreading rate dependence to upper crustal porosity structure. On-axis at the Endeavour segment, the calculated porosities from 0.4 km to 2 km are higher than those at the Lucky Strike segment, a slow spreading center [Seher et al., 2010]. Specifically at 2 km depth the porosity is sealed (0%) at the Endeavour segment but is ~1-2.5% at the Lucky Strike. This may be related to the differences in upper crustal thickness or depth of the axial magma chamber between the intermediate and slow spreading ridges. These results illustrate how upper crustal porosities are controlled by a combination of tectonic, magmatic and hydrothermal processes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85313", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85314" } }
{"authors":"Tongjiang Wang::Catholic University of America--Leon Ofman::Catholic University of America--Xudong Sun::Stanford University--Elena Provornikova::George Mason University--Joseph Davila::NASA Goddard SFC--", "title":"SH13B-2435: Coronal seismology of flare-excited longitudinal slow magnetoacoustic waves in hot coronal loops", "abstract":"The flare-excited longitudinal intensity oscillations in hot flaring loops have been recently detected by SDO/AIA in 94 and 131 bandpasses. These oscillations show similar physical properties (such as period, decay time, and trigger) as those slow-mode standing waves previously detected by the SOHO/SUMER spectrometer in Doppler shift of flare lines formed above 6 MK. The multi-wavelength AIA observations with high spatio-temporal resolution and wide temperature coverage enable us to measure both thermal and wave properties of the oscillating hot plasma with unprecedented accuracy. These new measurements can be used to diagnose the complicated energy transport processes in flare plasma by a technique called coronal seismology based on the combination of observations and MHD wave theory. From a detailed case study we have found evidence for thermal conduction suppression in hot loops by measuring the polytropic index and analyzing the phase relationship between the temperature and density wave signals. This result is not only crucial for better understanding the wave dissipation mechanism but also provides an alternative mechanism to explain the puzzles of long-duration events and X-ray loop-top sources which show much slower cooling than expected by the classical Spitzer conductive cooling. This finding may also shed a light on the coronal heating problem because weak thermal conductivity implies slower cooling of hot plasma in nanoflares, so increasing the average coronal temperature for the same heating rate. We will discuss the effects of thermal conduction suppression on the wave damping and loop cooling based on MHD simulations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85314", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85315" } }
{"authors":"Mauro Pau::University of Oslo--Øyvind Hammer::University of Oslo--Shyam Chand::Geological Survey of Norway--Galen Gisler::Los Alamos National Laboratory--", "title":"EP13A-0924: Constraints on the Dynamics of Seabed Pockmarks: an Integrated Sedimentological, Biostratigraphic, Geophysical, Oceanographic and Experimental Approach", "abstract":"Pockmarks are crater-like seabed depressions commonly resulting from focused fluid escape from soft, fine-grained sediments. Typically measuring 20–50 m across with depths of 2–10 m, these features often occur in extensive fields containing hundreds of them per square kilometre. They are prominent hazards for offshore installations such as oil rigs and pipelines, affecting vast areas worldwide. Besides, they represent a major geological source of methane, and their importance has been pointed out as contributors to the global climate variability. Sedimentological and biostratigraphic analyses of sediment cores were coupled with shallow seismic images to investigate the origin and evolution of a pockmark field in the southwestern Barents Sea, an epicontinental sea part of the Arctic Ocean. The pockmarks formed as a result of reduced sedimentation above active gas seeps near the retreating edge of the Barents Sea ice sheet about 15,000 years ago. The seepage is ascribed to climate change-induced dissociation of methane hydrates. These findings strengthen the case that pockmarks, worldwide, recorded the release of massive quantities of methane from the seafloor into the ocean during the last deglaciation. No evidence was found for current upward methane flux, so the pockmarks in the study area appear as inactive seabed features. Field measurements of currents and sediment fluxes in pockmarks in the Oslofjord, Norway, along with an experimental hydrodynamics study, provide insight into the mechanisms responsible for the long-term maintenance of inactive pockmarks. Near-bed currents may control the net sedimentation rate in these depressions by inhibiting the sedimentation from suspended transport. Enhanced turbulence and more intense biological activity suggest that the suspended fines are supported in the water column more easily in the pockmarks than on the surrounding bed, and can be transported away before settling. Moreover, upwelling generated by flow deflection over the pockmark morphology may winnow out the settling fine material. These mechanisms are proposed to be responsible for the lack of sediment infill that is often reported in inactive pockmarks, as well as for the frequently observed lag deposit of coarse material.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85315", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85316" } }
{"authors":"Hugo Gutierrez-Jurado::Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico Flinders University--Huade Guan::Flinders University--Jingfeng Wang::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--Hailong Wang::Flinders University--Rafael Bras::Georgia Tech--Craig Simmons::Flinders University--", "title":"H33L-03: Maximum Entropy Production Modeling of Evapotranspiration Partitioning on Heterogeneous Terrain and Canopy Cover: advantages and limitations.", "abstract":"Quantification of evapotranspiration (ET) and its partition over regions of heterogeneous topography and canopy poses a challenge using traditional approaches. In this study, we report the results of a novel field experiment design guided by the Maximum Entropy Production model of ET (MEP-ET), formulated for estimating evaporation and transpiration from homogeneous soil and canopy. A catchment with complex terrain and patchy vegetation in South Australia was instrumented to measure temperature, humidity and net radiation at soil and canopy surfaces. Performance of the MEP-ET model to quantify transpiration and soil evaporation was evaluated during wet and dry conditions with independently and directly measured transpiration from sapflow and soil evaporation using the Bowen Ratio Energy Balance (BREB). MEP-ET transpiration shows remarkable agreement with that obtained through sapflow measurements during wet conditions, but consistently overestimates the flux during dry periods. However, an additional term introduced to the original MEP-ET model accounting for higher stomatal regulation during dry spells, based on differences between leaf and air vapor pressure deficits and temperatures, significantly improves the model performance. On the other hand, MEP-ET soil evaporation is in good agreement with that from BREB regardless of moisture conditions. The experimental design allows a plot and tree scale quantification of evaporation and transpiration respectively. This study confirms for the first time that the MEP-ET originally developed for homogeneous open bare soil and closed canopy can be used for modeling ET over heterogeneous land surfaces. Furthermore, we show that with the addition of an empirical function simulating the plants ability to regulate transpiration, and based on the same measurements of temperature and humidity, the method can produce reliable estimates of ET during both wet and dry conditions without compromising its parsimony.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85316", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85317" } }
{"authors":"Erica Valdez::DePaul University Woods Hole Research Center--Kathleen Savage::Woods Hole Research Center--", "title":"B33C-0686: Spatial Heterogeneity of Greenhouse Gases at Howland Forest, Maine", "abstract":"Natural and human emissions of greenhouse gases (GHG’s)- carbon dioxide (CO2), methane gas (CH4), and nitrous oxide (N2O)- are important contributors to climate change. These GHG’s are released naturally from forested soils. Carbon dioxide flux tends to have a relatively low coefficient of variation (CV) compared to CH4 and N2O. Methane and nitrous oxide are often characterized by “hot spots” and “hot moments”, thus their CV are often very high compared to CO2, even in seemingly homogenous soil environments. The objective of this study is to determine the sampling intensity necessary for confidence estimates from forested soils of all three of these important GHGs. On July 2015, the emission of GHGs was measured from 36- randomly distributed soil flux- collars at the Howland Forest, Maine. A data analysis was run to determine how many chamber fluxes are needed to adequately estimate the mean and variance of GHGs fluxes. It was determined that both CO2 and CH4 had a 100% confidence estimate that a random 10,000 randomly sample group of an example of 8 fluxes had means within 50% of the full population mean and 14% confident for N2O. The confidence estimate that CO2, CH4, and N2O had means within 25% the full population mean was 97%, 92% and 9% and about 62%, 57% and 3% had means within the 10% full population mean. This analysis can be used to guide researchers when determining how many flux measurements may be necessary to achieve a desired level of confidence in their GHG estimates for their site.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85317", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85318" } }
{"authors":"Jungrack Kim::University of Seoul--HyunSeob Baik::Yonsei University--Hyoseok Seol::Hanyang University--", "title":"P53D-2158: The investigation of moving dunes over Mars using very high resolution topography and sub pixel co-registration method.", "abstract":"Although the origins and processes of Martian aeolian features, especially dunes, have not been fully identified yet, it has been better understood by the orbital observation method which has led to the identification of Martian dune migration such as a case in Nili Patera (Bridges, 2012), and the numerical model employing advanced computational fluid dynamics. Specifically, the recent introduction of very high-resolution image products, such as 25 cm-resolution HiRISE imagery and its precise photogrammetric processor, allows us to trace the estimated, although tiny, dune migration over the Martian surface. In this study, we attempted to improve the accuracy of active dune migration measurements by 1) the introduction of very high resolution ortho images and stereo analysis based on the hierarchical geodetic control (Kim and Muller, 2009) for better initial point settings; and 2) the improved sub-pixel co-registration algorithms using optical flow with a refinement stage based on a least squares correlation conducted on a pyramidal processor. Consequently, this scheme not only measured Martian dune migration more precisely, but it also achieved the extension of 3D observations combining stereo analysis and photoclinometry. The established algorithms have been tested using the HiRISE time series images over several dune fields, such as the Kaiser, Procter, and Rabe craters, which were reported by the Mars Global Digital Dune Database (Hayward et al., 2013). The detected dune migrations were significantly larger than previously reported values. The outcomes in our study will be demonstrated with the quantified values in 2D and volumetric direction. In the future, the method will be further applied to the dune fields in the Mars Global dune database comprehensively and can be compared with the improved General Circulation Model and the numerical simulation.  ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85318", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85319" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"PP33C-2315: Variability of the Oxygen Minimum Zone during the Holocene in the Gulf of California, México", "abstract":"Changes in the oxygen minimum zone (OMZ) in the southern portion of the Gulf of California (GoC) can be caused by changes in primary productivity or by advection of water masses with low oxygen concentrations. To discern the acting mechanism, multiple and gravity cores (NH01-22 and NH01-25) comprising the Holocene (~4800 and ~6600 years, respectively) were collected in the OMZ of the GoC during the CALMEX NH-01 cruise. Sediments were collected on the eastern slopes of Pescadero (PB) and Carmen (CB) Basins, intersecting in both cases the GoC’s distinct OMZ. The cores were sectioned at 1-cm intervals and analyzed for total Mo (MoTotal), total Al and Fe-pyrite. With these values, Mo enrichment factors (EFMo) and degrees of pyritization (DOP) were calculated for each sediment interval. Average DOP values for CB and PB were 38%±11% (n=306) and 28.6%±6.5% (n=259), respectively, indicating that the sediments are not limited by the availability of reactive Fe. Higher average MoTOTAL values were measured in CB (0.22±0.04 µmol g-1) relative to PB (0.09±0.02 µmol g-1). As a result, EFMo values were high (14.5±3.4, range of 6.6-35.6) in CB and significantly lower in PB (4.5±1.1, range of 2.7-12.0). For CB, EFMO values are comparable to regions such as the west coast of Baja California, Mexico (EFMO=20±9) and the euxinic Black Sea (EFMO=27±8) and Saanich Inlet, British Columbia (EFMO=39±35) zones. In PB EFMO values were similar to those reported for well oxygenated marginal basins (e.g., Japan Sea; EFMO=2.5±1.5). DOP values for CB and PB are generally <40%, characteristic of oxic sedimentary environments. The DOP and EFMO conflicting results could indicate that the sediments are not completely pyritized because Fe is also associated with acid volatile sulfides (unlikely), or that values <40% are not necessarily associated with oxic sedimentary environments. However, for both basins, the persistence of laminations, the EFMo levels and the DOP values suggest variable oxic, anoxic and even euxinic paleoenvironmental conditions, which were intermittently present during the last ~6.6 ky BP in the GoC.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85319", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85320" } }
{"authors":"Jennifer Galvin::California State University East Bay--Chai Deqiang::California State University East Bay--Ayoola Abimbola::California State University East Bay--Seth Shuler::California State University East Bay--Koichi Hayashi::Geometrics Inc.--Joshua Fox::California State University East Bay--Mitchell Craig::California State Univ East Bay--Luther Strayer::California State University East Bay--Patrick Drumm::California State University East Bay--", "title":"NS43B-1981: Geophysical Survey of Proposed Construction Site with Possible Faulting, East San Francisco Bay Hills, California", "abstract":"We conducted a geophysical study at a site proposed for a new dorm building prior to trenching planned as part of a separate fault investigation study. The study area was located on the south side of the CSU East Bay campus, roughly 100 – 300 m SSE of the current dorm complex. In addition to its proximity to the Hayward Fault, several smaller faults have been previously mapped within the proposed location, including the East and West Dibblee Faults. These faults are thought to represent contacts between the Leona Rhyolite and the Knoxville Formation. Data acquisition included seismic, resistivity, and GPS data collected in an effort to develop a better understanding of the geological and structural profile of this area, including the location of lithologic contacts, faults, and the thickness of soil and fill. Geophysical profiles were collected over the locations of future trenches. The survey included geophysical lines that were located coincident with two planned trenching sites, which were chosen to intersect mapped faults. Survey positions were recorded using differential GPS. Seismic refraction and MASW (multichannel analysis of surface waves) surveys were performed over two of the planned trench sites using a 48-channel seismographic system with 4.5 Hz geophones and a 10-lb sledgehammer. For one of the lines, geophones were spaced every 3 m with a total spread length of 141 m and a shot spacing of 9 m. For the second line, geophones were spaced every 4 m with a total spread length of 188 m. Shots were taken every 12 m. Resistivity surveys were also performed along one of the line locations using both a capacitively-coupled dipole (CCD) system and 48-electrode system. Geospatial data for the survey area were compiled, including 0.3 m color orthoimagery and vector line files for geologic unit boundaries and presumed fault locations. The products of this study will include the geophysical response of geologic formations, location of unit contacts and faults, thickness of soil and fill, shear wave velocity (VS and VS30). The results of this study will enable improved seismic hazard assessment of the site and will contribute to a better understanding of the overall geologic profile of this area.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85320", "section":"Near Surface Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85321" } }
{"authors":"Peter Darch::University of California Los Angeles University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--", "title":"IN21D-1719: Microbial diversity and methodological diversity: When standardized methods may or may not be beneficial in deep subseafloor biosphere research", "abstract":"Scientists are often encouraged, and sometimes required, to standardize methods for collecting, analyzing, managing, and reporting data. Methods standardization within and between scientific domains is often considered beneficial for collaboration, developing scientific tools, and curation and sharing of data. However, efforts to standardize are often resisted for a range of social and technical reasons. Here we present findings from a case study of a domain characterized by high methodological diversity. This domain, the deep subseafloor biosphere, studies interactions between subseafloor microbial communities and the physical environment they inhabit. We have conducted 49 interviews and observed practice over a period of 18 months; the study is still ongoing. Domain scientists depend on core samples and data obtained from International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP) cruises. During cruises, basic data are produced about the physical composition of cores, using standard methods. However, no comparable microbiological data is produced on cruises. Many leading deep subseafloor biosphere scientists are concerned that this lack of standardized microbiological data limits their domain’s scientific progress. They have identified heterogeneity of methods for microbiological analyses of cores as the major barrier to including such analyses on cruises. Among the actions these scientists have taken to promote methods standardization are journal articles and an international workshop. Despite these efforts, the community is not fully embracing standardization. One of the tensions is between perceived benefits for the community vs. a lack of incentives for individuals to perform necessary standardization work. This work includes meta-analyses to compare methods. However, the community lacks infrastructure and reward structures to support individuals to conduct such work. Another tension is concern amongst some scientists that standardizing methods now will foreclose development of better methods in the future. At the individual level, scientists worry their past work may be marginalized if their preferred methods are not selected as the new standards. All parties involved have legitimate concerns about how to balance individual and community needs in advancing the domain's scientific goals.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85321", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85324" } }
{"authors":"Emily Silveira::California State University Fullerton--Jennifer Palermo::California State University Fullerton--Matthew Kirby::California State University Fullerton--", "title":"PP51A-2282: Using Thecamoebians to Reconstruct 1300 Years of Limnological Change at Crystal Lake, Southern California", "abstract":"Thecamoebians are microscopic unicellar organisms that live in freshwater lakes and produce tests—or shells—that are morphologically distinct to each species. The population distribution of thecamoebian species within a lake can reveal such lake dynamics as trophic status, temperature, and acidity. Crystal Lake is a small alpine lake located in the San Gabriel Mountains of the coastal southwest United States. This project’s objective is to reconstruct a 1300 yr paleolimnological record for Crystal Lake using thecamoebian assemblages. The latter reconstruction will be examined in the context of paleoclimatological interpretations from the same core (Palermo et al., 2015) to determine to what extent – if any – changes in thecamoebian assemblages respond to, and record, paleoclimatological changes such as the Medieval Climate Anomaly and the Little Ice Age. Core CLPC14-1 was extracted from Crystal Lake’s depocenter in May 2014. Grain size, magnetic susceptibility, and LOI 550°C and 950°C were measured at 1 cm contiguous intervals; additionally, C:N ratios and C and N isotopic analyses were measured every 2 cm (Palermo, 2015). Thecamoebian assemblages were analyzed in five modern surface samples, as well as throughout the core at 2 cm intervals (aligning with the other analyses performed). Statistical analysis was performed to determine significant patterns within the assemblages. Eleven AMS 14C dates of discrete organic matter (i.e. wood or charcoal) were used to generate an age model using Beacon v2.2; for the past 200 years, age control is based on correlation to Rothenberg et al. (2010) core ages (Palermo, 2015).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85324", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85328" } }
{"authors":"Lauren Shumaker::Stanford University--Zane Jobe::Shell Houston--Stephan Graham::Stanford University--", "title":"EP13A-0930: Constraining the Formation of Submarine Gullies on Continental Slopes", "abstract":"Submarine gullies are ubiquitous on continental slopes and steep areas of seafloor worldwide, but their role in sediment transport remains unresolved. Direct observation of flows in the submarine realm is rare and expensive, but by analyzing basic geometries of gullies in the sedimentary record, it is possible to gain insight into the behavior of the flows that formed them. In shallow 3D seismic reflection data from the Taranaki Basin, New Zealand, we document gullies preserved in a Pliocene-Pleistocene progradational margin sequence. These gullies commonly form aggradational complexes hundreds of meters thick, showing alternating periods of erosion, inactivity, and roughly self-similar aggradation in response to slope sedimentation. Erosional phases speak of modification by energetic turbidity currents, whereas sediment drapes point to extended periods of flow quiescence and hemipelagic deposition. We pair these observations with morphometrics of over 600 gullies in seafloor bathymetry from continental margins worldwide. The slopes of these modern gullies and interfluves are both well described by a power-law decay with along-profile distance. The decay of slopes with distance (concavity) obtained from power-law relationships for interfluves and gullies are well correlated, although gullies attain higher slopes and are slightly more concave than neighboring interfluves. The self-similar growth of gullies in the subsurface and the strong similarity between gully and interfluve profiles in all datasets suggests a link between the evolution of gullies and of the slopes on which they form. We conclude by presenting a conceptual model in which gully and slope morphology are tightly coupled.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85328", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85329" } }
{"authors":"Andrei Khlystov::Desert Research Institute Reno--R Subramanian::Carnegie Mellon University--", "title":"A21A-0098: Volatility Properties of Internally- and Externally-Mixed Ambient Aerosols at an Anthropogenically-influenced Forest Site in Southeastern USA", "abstract":"Secondary organic aerosol (SOA) from biogenic sources has a significant contribution to ambient aerosol loadings in Southeastern USA and thus contributes to adverse health effects of air pollution and influences regional and global climate. Volatility properties of biogenic SOA determine its concentration, reactivity, and lifetime, but are still largely unknown. As part of a larger study to assess the effect of biogenic SOA on aerosol optical properties, a set of instruments, including scanning mobility sizers (SMPS), single particle soot photometer (SP2), and a thermodenuder, was deployed during June 2015 at a Duke Forest site near Chapel Hill, NC. The site is characterized by a significant contribution of both biogenic and urban (mostly traffic) sources. Measurements of changes in aerosol volume and optical size upon heating in the thermodenuder at different temperatures are used to derive volatility properties of the ambient aerosol. A limited set of experiments was carried out using the tandem differential mobility analysis (TDMA) approach to investigate whether the ambient aerosol at the Duke Forest site is internally mixed with respect to its volatility properties. In this presentation we will discuss equilibrium and kinetic aspects of aerosol volatility observed during this study and implications of external vs. internal mixing for derivation of bulk volatility properties of ambient aerosol.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85329", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85330" } }
{"authors":"Tianyu Jiang::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--", "title":"A51J-0203: The resolution dependency of atmospheric blocking in the aqua-planet experiments", "abstract":"Quasi-stationary planetary waves forced by topography or other zonally asymmetric features are usually suggested to be essential for blocking formation; however, we found the 2-D feature of blocking could also occur frequently without these precondition. In a set of aqua-planet simulations with setting of perpetual spring, the blocking feature is identified through a combination of meridional height gradient and 2-D height anomaly. The general distribution resembles the Pacific blocking, but more equatorward. The resolution sensitivity experiment suggests that, associated with the poleward shift of the subtropical jet stream, the blocking activity also moves northward with higher resolution, and converges between 60km and 30km. The blocking with finer resolution also shows a more realistic characteristic timesale. By utilizing the wave activity budget analysis, it is found that, in the decay stage, the effective diffusivity would be much larger, thus the blocking waves are absorbed more efficiently by the mean flow.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85330", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85331" } }
{"authors":"Jacek Scibek::McGill University--", "title":"MR41E-06: Comparing Biases of Fault Zone Permeability Magnitudes and Inferred Conceptual Models - Global Multidisciplinary Compilation and Mapping", "abstract":"Although fault zones have been studied worldwide, there have been no global mapping, compilation and meta-analysis of interpretations of the fault zone permeability structures and/or methodological biases. To investigate biases in data collection sources we review ~2000 published studies and reports and summarize categorical data from over 600 cases, including ~200 studies with reported fault zone permeability, transmissivity, or diffusivity estimates from the fault damage zone, fault core, whole fault zone, and protolith. The data are categorized into fault zone permeability structures (e.g. barrier, conduit, barrier-conduit, etc.) and are evaluated with respect to the type of fluid flow or permeability observation, the data collection source (e.g. studies in structural geology, hydrogeology, tunneling, mining, engineering, etc.), and on the scale of measurement. Our results show that the combined conduit-barrier fault zone structure is observed in only 15-20% of the cases (but up to 60% of structural geology cases if paleo-conduit studies are included). The barrier structure is observed in ~30% of the faults in structural geology, hydrogeology, and mining studies, and in over 40% petroleum engineering studies, but in less than 10% in tunnel engineering and rarely in geothermal engineering. The barrier nature of faults is detected primarily with qualitative observations (water levels and pressures, water geochemistry), and is difficult to measure in the subsurface. Some hydrogeological observations favour the detection of hydraulic barriers or conduits, but not both equally. Therefore, the frequency of fault zone conceptual models (barriers/conduits) globally or within a region may be a result of measurement bias and not of actual conditions. We also compare reported permeability values at three scales of measurement: matrix permeability, small scale fractured bulk permeability, and whole fault zone permeability. The quantitative permeability anisotropy or scaling ratio between the fault core or fault damage zone and protolith is only reported in fewer than 30 studies (excluding numerical/parametric modelling with assumed permeability). We use the global data summaries and statistical comparisons to comment on the multidisciplinary understanding of fluid flow in fault zones.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85331", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85332" } }
{"authors":"Jaebeom Kim::Kangwon National University--", "title":"GC13B-1140: Estimating fractional vegetation cover (FVC) using satellite vegetation indices and digital photo image in Mongolia", "abstract":"Fractional vegetation cover (FVC) is a useful index of monitoring land cover dynamics and land surface energy partitioning into sensible and latent heats from satellite because it can be estimated by using satellite-based spectral vegetation indices (VI), such as NDVI and EVI. The relationship between FVC and vegetation indices is however variable depending on regional vegetation types and background soil types across different regions. In particular, arid and semi-arid region shows substantial uncertainty in the VI-FVC relations because of sparse vegetation cover and hence, important roles of local soil type in land-surface spectral reflectance. In this study, VI-FVC relations were investigated for arid and semi-arid regions of Mongolia. The FVC data was prepared from digital-camera image interpretation sheets taken at 160 sites in our field excursions from 2012 to 2014. In comparisons with visual inspections, the camera-based FVC showed good linear relations (r = 0.97, p < 0.001) with 6.83% of RMSE. Three satellite-based VIs were prepared, i.e. MODIS NDVI, EVI, and SAVI, which applied to produce linear regression models of FVC. The model parameters (i.e. slope and intercept) was obtained through iterated calculation process. Among the 160 sites, 120 sites were arbitrarily extracted to produce regression model and the remaining 40 sites were used for model validation. This iterated process were repeated 1,000,000 times and then, statistics were derived as averages of model (slope and interception) and validation (Pearson correlation coefficient and RMSE). In results, the regression models generally showed good agreements in model validations over r = 0.8 (p < 0.001). This study discussed problems in long-term FVC retrieval for the arid and semi-arid regions of Mongolia.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85332", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85333" } }
{"authors":"Jonathan Miller::San Jose State University--Natalie Baker::San Jose State University--Jorge Vazquez::USGS--Mae Marcaida::USGS Western Regional Offices Menlo Park San Jose State University--Marsha Lidzbarski::USGS/San Jose State University--", "title":"V23B-3129: Zircon trace element geochemistry and growth of the Pleistocene to Holocene Mono Craters rhyolite magma system, California (USA)", "abstract":"The Mono Craters, part of the Mono-Inyo volcanic chain in eastern California, comprise at least 27 high-silica Pleistocene to Holocene rhyolite domes, lava flows and tephra cones. The Holocene chronology of the Mono Craters is well constrained but only recently has 238U-230Th zircon and 40Ar/39Ar dating elucidated the Pleistocene eruptive history. We performed trace element analysis on dated zircon crystal rims and sectioned interiors (using SHRIMP-RG) from 3 rhyolite domes (21, 12.5, and 7 ka) with additional rim data on 5 ashes separated from juvenile pumice clasts in the correlative Wilson Creek Formation (spanning from 62 to 21 ka). Ti-in-zircon (TTi,zrc) thermometry (titania activity from coexisting Fe-Ti oxides) gives temperatures predominantly between 650°C and 750°C, similar to average zircon saturation temperatures (Tzrc,sat). The observation that Tzrc,sat ≈ TTi,zrc indicates that Mono Craters rhyolite magmas were zircon-saturated and erupted at these temperatures (near water-saturated granite eutectic). Variations in key trace elements are relatively limited overall and zircons display similar REE patterns with generally curved MREE to HREE patterns and prominent negative Eu anomalies. Most of the variation is observed in zircons from older eruptions (62-41 ka). Zircon rims from Ash 17 of the Wilson Creek Formation (59 ka) have elevated Th/U, Eu/Eu*, and Ti and lower Hf compared to Ash 19 (62 ka), which suggests a thermal rejuvenation event between these two eruptions. Zircon rims from Ash 15 (41 ka) are characterized by a trend toward high Hf, at relatively low and relatively constant Ti, and low Eu/Eu*, consistent with rhyolite magma undergoing eutectic-like crystallization just prior to eruption. Zircon surfaces and interiors for the 21, 12.5, and 7 ka dome eruptions have very similar Hf, low Eu/Eu*, low Ti, and low Th/U. This requires zircon crystallization in a very uniform thermal and chemical environment from the latest Pleistocene to Holocene (a feldspar-saturated, crystal mush?).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85333", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85334" } }
{"authors":"Eloisa Zepeda-Alarcon::University of California Berkeley--Hans-Rudolf Wenk::University of California Berkeley--Matthew Kasemer::Cornell University--Paul Dawson::Cornell University--Robert Carson::Cornell University--", "title":"MR13C-2715: Finite Element Modeling of Crystallographic Preferred Orientation (CPO) in Two- Phase Aggregates: Rrelevant for Anisotropy of the Earth’s lower Lower Mantle", "abstract":"Deformation of lower mantle minerals has been studied experimentally in some detail, but the underlying physical processes that govern deformation are still not well understood. We have implemented the orthorhombic symmetry in the viscoplastic finite element code FEpX developed at Cornell University, making this code useful for understanding plasticity of mineral aggregates like bridgmanite (with perovskite structure) and ferropericlase, the main mineral components of the lower mantle. High pressure radial diamond anvil cell (rDAC) and large volume press (D-DIA) experiments suggest that CPO is much weaker in 2-phase aggregates compared to 1-phase aggregates. But so far this has not been modeled satisfactorily with polycrystal plasticity theory that assumes that grains deform homogeneously, such as the Taylor or self-consistent approaches. Since it is expected that local heterogeneity plays a crucial role in deformation of 2-phase aggregates, we use a finite element approach where each grain in the aggregate is composed of individual elements. The constitutive equations between stress and strain are solved for all the elements in the aggregate, taking the local environment of each element into account. The FEpX code models the mechanical behavior of a virtual polycrystal, generated by the Neper code, which deforms by dislocation slip over large strain paths. The slip systems for the orthorhombic perovskite structure have been implemented into the code and, in particular, the development of CPO due to different combinations of slip systems is examined in the 2-phase aggregate of bridgmanite and periclase. Preliminary results show that there is an important correlation between CPO of both bridgmanite and periclase with the relative volume fractions and the microstructure of the aggregate. If the soft periclase is interconnected it absorbs deformation by grain boundary sliding instead of by dislocation glide. Model results are compared with high pressure r-DAC experiments, where x-ray diffraction patterns are analyzed with the software MAUD to quantify CPO in the sample. Experimental CPO is compared with predictions from the FEpX model. With this approach we can draw conclusions about deformation processes in complex aggregates, which have a great significance in many geological processes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85334", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85335" } }
{"authors":"Guanglang Xu::Texas A & M University College Station--Ping Yang::Texas A & M University College Station--Sarah Brooks::Texas A & M University--", "title":"A11A-0008: Modeling Optical Properties of Polluted Dust and its Morphological Effects by T-Matrix Method", "abstract":"Dust storms largely contribute to regional or global aerosol loads, influence radiative energy budget, and air quality, and cause atmospheric environmental, public health problems. As dusts are transported long distances, aerosols such as black carbon can pollute the air mass along the transport path. Two mixing processes, externally and semi-externally (sticking) mixing may substantially affect the single-scattering and radiative properties of polluted dust particles compared to the unpolluted counterparts. This study focuses on quantifying the changes in the optical properties of dust aerosols due to black carbon contamination. The dust model we use is an irregular polyhedron, which is in good agreement with the laboratory measurement. The black carbon model is spherules aggregate defined with a cluster-cluster aggregation algorithm. Specifically, we define the degree of pollution in terms of two variables, the adhesion degree of pollutants and their mixing ratios, since both can alter the optical properties of polluted dust in different ways. By applying the Invariant Imbedding T-matrix Method (II-TM), we obtain the scattering phase matrix and other optical properties of dust aerosols with different degrees of contamination. Furthermore, the morphological effects on the optical properties of polluted dust are quantified by considering different fractal dimensions of black carbon as particles age. The overall changes due to different degrees of pollution by black carbon are investigated at various wavelengths.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85335", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85336" } }
{"authors":"Samantha Weaver::University of Hawaii at Manoa--Bruce Houghton::University of Hawaii at Manoa--Helge Gonnermann::Rice University--Laurent Arbaret::University of Orleans--Alain Burgisser::ISTerre--", "title":"V31B-3019: Complexities within the shallow conduit during Vulcanian explosions: Insights from Episode IV of the 1912 eruption of Novarupta, Alaska", "abstract":"Models for initiation of Vulcanian eruptions involve disruption of a conduit-sealing plug or dome and the downward propagation of decompression and fragmentation waves into the conduit. At this time, we have a limited understanding of the physical state of the magma prior to its disruption, including the range of viscosities and vesicularities and the extent to which brecciated, outgassed, degassed, and volatile-rich melt may be co-mingled. Current models propose that the dense, outgassed dome/plug overlies an orderly, predominantly horizontally layered conduit with pressure increasing with depth. The 1912 eruption of Novarupta, Alaska, U.S.A. provided a unique situation to study Vulcanian explosions because its proximal deposits are exceptionally well preserved. After 60 hours and three episodes of Plinian activity and caldera collapse 10 km from vent, a dacite dome was extruded and completely destroyed by a Vulcanian phase. The fifth and final episode comprised of extrusion of a rhyolite dome without explosive activity, thus allowing preservation of the Episode IV Vulcanian block apron. We have collected data on over 1,300 of the largest juvenile and lithic blocks within an ~2-3 km radius from vent, making Episode IV the best mapped Vulcanian deposit in the world to-date. Sectors rich in specific lithologies (pumice, dense dacite, flow-banded clasts or breccia, +/- breadcrusting) and/or of contrasting block size suggest multiple explosions. Vesicularities of breadcrust rinds preserve syn-eruptive vesicularities and volatile contents and suggest considerable heterogeneity on length scales down to mm. Their vesicularity range is between 0.5 and 55% whereas dense dacite blocks lie between 0 and 33%. On equally short length scales, similar broad ranges for porosity/permeability and contrasts in micro-textures indicate major physical and chemical heterogeneity reflecting very local variations in the extent to which the melt was degassed or outgassed. Our new data suggest (1) that different explosions tapped small yet diverse parts of the conduit’s architecture and (2) a scenario more complicated than a simple horizontally stratified magma-filled conduit that was progressively evacuated in a top-down fashion.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85336", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85338" } }
{"authors":"Matthew Turner::University of Idaho--", "title":"IN53B-1840: Hydrological Modeling Reproducibility Through Data Management and Adaptors for Model Interoperability", "abstract":"Because of a lack of centralized planning and no widely-adopted standards among hydrological modeling research groups, research communities, and the data management teams meant to support research, there is chaos when it comes to data formats, spatio-temporal resolutions, ontologies, and data availability. All this makes true scientific reproducibility and collaborative integrated modeling impossible without some glue to piece it all together. Our Virtual Watershed Integrated Modeling System provides the tools and modeling framework hydrologists need to accelerate and fortify new scientific investigations by tracking provenance and providing adaptors for integrated, collaborative hydrologic modeling and data management. Under global warming trends where water resources are under increasing stress, reproducible hydrological modeling will be increasingly important to improve transparency and understanding of the scientific facts revealed through modeling. The Virtual Watershed Data Engine is capable of ingesting a wide variety of heterogeneous model inputs, outputs, model configurations, and metadata. We will demonstrate one example, starting from real-time raw weather station data packaged with station metadata. Our integrated modeling system will then create gridded input data via geostatistical methods along with error and uncertainty estimates. These gridded data are then used as input to hydrological models, all of which are available as web services wherever feasible. Models may be integrated in a data-centric way where the outputs too are tracked and used as inputs to “downstream” models. This work is part of an ongoing collaborative Tri-state (New Mexico, Nevada, Idaho) NSF EPSCoR Project, WC-WAVE, comprised of researchers from multiple universities in each of the three states. The tools produced and presented here have been developed collaboratively alongside watershed scientists to address specific modeling problems with an eye on the bigger picture of scientific reproducibility and transparency, and data publication and reuse.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85338", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85339" } }
{"authors":"Laurel Brigham::University of California San Diego--Joost Van Haren::University of Arizona--", "title":"GC33B-1281: Response of Stem Respiration of Two Tropical Species to an Imposed Drought", "abstract":"Increased instances of drought are predicted for tropical forests; therefore, it is important to better understand how drought will affect individual aspects of the forest carbon cycle. Through photosynthesis, CO2 is assimilated into sugars, a dominant portion of which goes to the stems where it is used for growth and cell maintenance. Both processes produce CO2 through respiration, which leaves the stem through the bark. This investigation focused on how stem CO2 efflux differs between two tree species in the tropical rainforest biome of Biosphere 2 in Oracle, Arizona—a species of legume (Clitoria racemosa) and a species of non-legume (Phytolacca dioica). A flexible chamber was strapped to each tree and the CO2 that diffused across the bark was measured with a LI-7000. A 4-week long drought was imposed in an effort to simulate future conditions resulting from climate change. It was found that C. racemosa had an overall higher CO2 efflux than P. dioica. C. racemosa has thinner bark than P. dioica, which displays a secondary thickening of its stem as a result of successive cambia; therefore, CO2 could more easily diffuse from the stems of C. racemosa. The results also indicate that decreased soil moisture, as a result of the drought, leads to a significantly lower CO2 efflux from C. racemosa whereas no significant change was observed in P. dioica. This suggests that C. racemosa is more sensitive to water stress than P. dioica, which may have greater water storage capabilities due to its successive cambia. The differing reactions of C. racemosa and P. dioica to decreased soil moisture could be important for calculating carbon stocks and modeling the response of tropical trees to drought.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85339", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85341" } }
{"authors":"Jeffrey Kargel::University of Arizona--Daniel Shugar::University of Washington Tacoma Campus--Umesh Haritashya::University of Dayton--Gregory Leonard::University of Arizona--Eric Fielding::Jet Propulsion Lab Caltech--Kenneth Hudnut::USGS Pasadena Field Office--Randall Jibson::U.S. Geological Survey--Brian Collins::USGS Western Regional Offices Menlo Park--", "title":"NH43D-01: Geological, Geophysical, and Stochastic Factors in Nepal’s Gorkha Earthquake-Triggered Landslide Distribution", "abstract":"On 25 April 2015, a magnitude 7.8 earthquake struck Nepal. Subsequently many large aftershocks shook the region, including one of magnitude 7.3. Much damage and over 4300 landslides were triggered. The landslides were mapped by a volunteer group who self organized to undertake an emergency response to the earthquake disaster. The number of landslides is fewer than expected based on total released seismic energy. This may be because of lack of a surface rupture and possibly also because of high surface-wave attenuation due to rugged surface topography or to the geological and geophysical characteristics of the upper crust. The observed landslides were primarily in the southern half of the Himalaya in areas where the steepest slopes occur and where peak ground accelerations were relatively high. The landslides are also concentrated on the tectonically downdropped block. However, the distribution is complex and varies dramatically from valley to valley. Furthermore, different types of landslides are concentrated in different geologic materials, which suggests local factors control the valley-scale attenuation or amplification of seismic waves or the way wave disturbances couple to the local geologic materials. Across the earthquake-affected zone on the regional scale, wave attenuation and also net downdrop and uplift may also explain as much about the distribution of landslides as slopes and distance from large slips on the fault. We will offer the regional distribution results and some specific case studies to illustrate a set of possible controlling factors.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85341", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85342" } }
{"authors":"Greg Drozd::University of California Berkeley--Bruce Frodin::California Air Resources Board--Yunliang Zhao::Carnegie Mellon University--Jonathan Franklin::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--Eben Cross::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--Rawad Saleh::Carnegie Mellon University--Georges Saliba::Carnegie Mellon University--Andrew Lambe::Aerodyne Research Inc.--Satya Sardar::California Air Resources Board--Hector Maldonado::California Air Resources Board--Lynn Russell::University of California San Diego--Jesse Kroll::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--Allen Robinson::Carnegie Mellon University--Allen Goldstein::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"A23N-09: Detailed gas and diesel vehicle emissions: PTR-MS measurements of real-time VOC profiles and comprehensive characterization of primary emissions for IVOC, SVOC, and LVOC by gas chromatography with vacuum ultra-violet ionization mass spectrometry", "abstract":"Over the past fifteen years US vehicle emissions standards have dramatically improved, with the goal of reducing urban air pollution. Recent studies demonstrate secondary organic aerosol (SOA) to be the dominant contributor to urban organic aerosol, but controversy remains regarding the contributions of different vehicle types to SOA. Increased potency for SOA formation from non methane hydrocarbons (NMHC) from newer vehicles that meet tighter emission standards has also been observed. Both speciation and temporal resolution of vehicular emissions are critical for predicting SOA formation. The relative importance of diesel and gasoline emissions to SOA formation depends critically on speciation. Experiments were conducted at the California Air Resources Board Haagen-Smit Laboratory to better understand SOA formation for low, ultra-low, super ultra-low and partial zero emission vehicles (LEV, ULEV, SULEV, PZEV). Exhaust was sampled on filters and adsorbent tubes to measure intermediate-, semi-, and low-volatility NMHC (IVOC, SVOC, LVOC). A proton-transfer-reaction mass spectrometer (PTR-MS) measured volatile organics (VOC) emissions with high time-resolution. Analysis of filters and adsorbent tubes using gas chromatography with vacuum-ultra-violet ionization mass spectrometry provided unprecedented characterization of emissions according to degree of branching, number of cyclic rings, aromaticity, and molecular weight. ULEV vehicles show the composition distributions of primary particulate emissions peak for compounds in the SVOC range. PZEV vehicle emissions peak in the IVOC range. Diesel vehicles have up to ten times higher emissions than gasoline vehicles; their distributions have significant IVOC levels and peak in the SVOC/LVOC range. Our measurements are used to predict potential SOA formation by vehicle standard class and the relative SOA formation for diesel and gasoline vehicles. PTR-MS measurement show VOC emissions after cold start occur almost entirely in the first 30-60 seconds, and both their magnitude and duration consistently decrease with stricter standards.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85342", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85343" } }
{"authors":"Lee Slater::Rutgers Univ--Anders Lund::University of Copenhagen Rutgers Univ--Estella Atekwana::Oklahoma State University Main Campus--Silvia Rossbach::Western Michigan University--Dimitrios Ntarlagiannis::Rutgers University Newark--Barbara Bekins::USGS Western Regional Offices Menlo Park--", "title":"H41J-07: Indications of Coupled Carbon and Iron Cycling at a Hydrocarbon-Contaminated Site from Time-Lapse Magnetic Susceptibility (MS) Profiles", "abstract":"Magnetic susceptibility (MS) data acquired at hydrocarbon contaminated sites have documented enhanced MS within the smear zone (zone of water table fluctuation at hydrocarbon contaminated location) coincident with the free phase (mobile or free liquids moving down through the unsaturated zone independent of the direction of flow of the groundwater or surface water) hydrocarbon plume These studies suggest that magnetic susceptibility can be used as a tool to: (1) infer regions of hydrocarbon contamination, and (2) investigate intrinsic bioremediation by iron reducing bacteria. We performed a campaign of time-lapse MS monitoring at the National Crude Oil Spill Fate and Natural Attenuation Research Site (Bemidji, MN) between July 2011 and August 2015. This highly instrumented site has multiple boreholes installed through the free phase, dissolved phase and uncontaminated portions of the aquifer impacted by an oil spill resulting from a pipeline rupture in 1979. Magnetic susceptibility (MS) data acquired in 2011 showed that MS values in the smear zone are higher than in the dissolved phase plume and background, leading to the hypothesis that MS measurements could be used to monitor the long-term progress of biodegradation at the site. However, repeated MS data acquired in 2014 and 2015 showed strong changes in the character of the MS signal in the smear zone with multiple free phase contamination locations showing a strong suppression of the signal relative to that observed in 2011. Other locations in the dissolved phase of the plume show evidence for vertical migration of the zone of enhanced MS, possibly due to changes in the redox profiles driven by hydrology. Such changes in the MS signal are hypothesized to result from either variations in Fe(II)/Fe(III) ratios in the magnetite or changes in the magnetite concentration associated with coupled carbon and iron biogeochemistry. This work is generating a unique time-lapse geophysical dataset providing information on the spatial and temporal dynamics of iron mineral transformations associated with hydrocarbon degradation at the site.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85343", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85344" } }
{"authors":"V. Chandrasekar::Colorado State University--Haonan Chen::Colorado State University--Minda Le::Colorado State University--Sounak Biswas::Colorado State University--", "title":"H12E-08: Level One Validation Concept for GPM over Dallas - Fort Worth Urban Network", "abstract":"The Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) Core Observatory was launched on February 27, 2014. The two advanced instruments onboard GPM, namely, Dual-frequency Precipitation Radar (DPR) and GPM Microwave Imager (GMI), can provide measurement of rainfall, snowfall, ice and other precipitation over most of the globe. As an integral part of all satellite precipitation missions, ground validation helps to quantify precipitation measurement uncertainty and provide insight into the physical and statistical basis of retrieval algorithms. Among various validation instruments, ground-based dual-polarization radar (at S, C and X band frequencies) has been shown to be a powerful tool to estimate surface rainfall. This paper will present the concept of level one validation of GPM using high resolution precipitation observations from DFW network. The area of interest in this study is Dallas-Fort Worth (DFW) Metroplex, which hosts a network of six high-resolution dual-polarization X-band radars operated by the center for Collaborative Adaptive Sensing of the Atmosphere (CASA) and the NWS WSR-88DP radar (i.e., KFWS radar). The DFW network QPE product has been shown to be of excellent quality, in terms of accuracy as well as space time resolution (Chen and Chandrasekar, Journal of Hydrology, May (2015)). Detailed comparisons will be conducted between GPM based rainfall estimates and ground radar observations collected during the GPM satellite overpasses over DFW region. Dual-polarization based raindrop size distribution (DSD) retrieval, quantitative precipitation estimation (QPE), and hydrometeor classifications will be presented in detail.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85344", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85345" } }
{"authors":"Bruno Colas::Macquarie University--Simon Clark::Macquarie University--Dorrit Jacob::Macquarie University--", "title":"MR41D-2678: Constraints on Biogenic Emplacement of Crystalline Calcium Carbonate and Dolomite", "abstract":"Amorphous calcium carbonate (ACC) is a biogenic precursor of calcium carbonates forming shells and skeletons of marine organisms, which are key components of the whole marine environment. Understanding carbonate formation is an essential prerequisite to quantify the effect climate change and pollution have on marine population. Water is a critical component of the structure of ACC and the key component controlling the stability of the amorphous state. Addition of small amounts of magnesium (1-5% of the calcium content) is known to promote the stability of ACC presumably through stabilization of the hydrogen bonding network. Understanding the hydrogen bonding network in ACC is fundamental to understand the stability of ACC. Our approach is to use Monte-Carlo simulations constrained by X-ray and neutron scattering data to determine hydrogen bonding networks in ACC as a function of magnesium doping. We have already successfully developed a synthesis protocol to make ACC, and have collected X-ray data, which is suitable for determining Ca, Mg and O correlations, and have collected neutron data, which gives information on the hydrogen/deuterium (as the interaction of X-rays with hydrogen is too low for us to be able to constrain hydrogen atom positions with only X-rays). The X-ray and neutron data are used to constrain reverse Monte-Carlo modelling of the ACC structure using the Empirical Potential Structure Refinement program, in order to yield a complete structural model for ACC including water molecule positions. We will present details of our sample synthesis and characterization methods, X-ray and neutron scattering data, and reverse Monte-Carlo simulations results, together with a discussion of the role of hydrogen bonding in ACC stability.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85345", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85346" } }
{"authors":"Timothy Myers::Scripps Institution of Oceanography--Joel Norris::University of California San Diego--", "title":"A54B-02: Reducing the uncertainty in subtropical cloud feedback", "abstract":"Boundary layer clouds over the subtropical oceans are a key aspect of climate, but large uncertainties remain on how they will adjust to anthropogenic climate change and whether they will act to amplify or diminish global warming. Here, a statistical method is proposed to explain the subtropical cloud feedback in abrupt 4xCO2 experiments of 19 global climate models participating in the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project phase 5 (CMIP5). First principles indicate that boundary layer cloudiness is largely controlled by sea surface temperature, the strength of the temperature inversion capping the clouds, horizontal surface temperature advection, free-tropospheric moisture, and subsidence. This motivates us to employ multi-linear regression to explain the subtropical cloud feedback in the CMIP5 ensemble using these parameters as predictor variables. We find that this linear framework is a valid approach to explain the shortwave cloud radiative effect feedback in models that realistically simulate interannual relationships between subtropical clouds and meteorology. These models produce a positive subtropical cloud feedback. Models that poorly simulate such relationships produce negative cloud feedbacks that are unlikely to occur in nature. Based on the observed cloud-meteorology relationships from two satellite cloud datasets and four atmospheric reanalyses, we conclude that the subtropical cloud feedback will likely be weakly positive due to an increase in sea-surface temperature in the perturbed climate, partially offset by a negative feedback that arises due to an increase in estimated inversion strength.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85346", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85347" } }
{"authors":"Corinne Benedek::University of Cambridge--Marco Tedesco::CUNY City College of New York--", "title":"C51B-0712: Over-wintering of Supraglacial Lakes on the Greenland Ice Sheet from Sentinel-1 and Landsat-8 Data", "abstract":"Supra-glacial lakes on the GrIS have become a focus of research relating to the contribution of the GrIS to sea level rise. Lakes have been observed to appear during the summer melt season. Though it appears that the quantity of water collected on the surface is small, it is thought that the fracture and drainage of these lakes delivers significant pulses of water to the ice sheet bed, influencing the dynamic movement of glaciers towards the sea. The pattern of this transport mechanism may be a central driver of its influence over dynamic losses, as the flow of the viscoelastic ice sheet will differ if the water is delivered in a short pulse or a slower constant supply. A number of studies have catalogued the traits of lakes with an aim to quantify lake areas, depths, and timing of formation and cessation using visible and near infrared remote sensing instruments mostly focused on the summer melt season. Little is known about the behaviour of the surface lakes over the winter. A recent examination of the over-wintering of surface lakes has been conducted by Koenig et al. [2015] using airborne radar. While the study is extensive in area covered, it is limited in its temporal resolution by the availability of Operation IceBridge data, typically at one pass per year. This study seeks to observe the development of lakes over the winter period. Sentinel-1A radar images are used to track the presence of surface lakes and their variation in three study sites on the Greenland ice sheet. The sites are as follows: upstream of Ryder glacier, upstream of Petermann glacier, and upstream of Jakobshavn glacier. Water masks are created based on summer Landsat-8 images following NDWIice  and then compared to Sentinel images at monthly temporal resolution through the winter of 2014-2015. These radar images show persistence of liquid water through the winter in agreement with previous research as well as variation in the buried lake area over the span of the year studied.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85347", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85348" } }
{"authors":"Paloma Spina::Cornell University--Gary Lovett::Cary Institute--Colin Fuss::Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies--Christine Goodale::Cornell University--Ashley Lang::University of Georgia--Timothy Fahey::Cornell University--", "title":"B33D-0748: Do Forest Age and Soil Depth Affect Carbon and Nitrogen Adsorption in Mineral Horizons?", "abstract":"Mineral soils retain large amounts of organic matter through sorption on the surfaces of mineral soils, the largest pools of carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) in the forests of the northeastern U.S. In addition to determining organic matter storage, adsorption and desorption processes are important controllers of runoff chemistry. We are studying adsorption dynamics of mineral soils collected from a chronosequence of hardwood forest sites in the White Mountains, NH to determine how soils vary in their DOM adsorption capacities as a function of effective C and N saturation. We hypothesize that forest age determines proximity to saturation because young forests may need to mine soil organic matter (SOM) in mineral soils to obtain nitrogen to meet growth demands, while the soils of older forests have had time to reaccumulate SOM, eventually reaching C and N saturation. Consequently, we expect adsorption capacities to first increase with forest age in young forests, as the trees mine C and N from mineral surfaces. They will then decrease with forest age in older forests as mining slows and C and N begin to re-accumulate. Batch experiments were conducted with mineral soil samples and dilutions of forest floor leachate. However, preliminary results from a mature forest site (about 100 years old), which we predicted to be a low point of C and N saturation from decades of mining, contradict expectations. Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) adsorption in its shallow mineral soil layers (0-3 cm below E or A horizons) are lower than younger sites ranging from 20 to about 40 years old. In addition to forest age, soil depths also affect N retention dynamics in forest soils. We hypothesized that deeper mineral soils might have greater adsorption capacities due to the fact that they are exposed to less DOC and DON leaching from organic layers and therefore less saturated. Results from the same mature forest site confirm this. Soils from 3-10 cm depth have more potential to adsorb DOC and DON than soils from 0-3 cm depth. For example, at 80 mg/L DOC, the >3-10 layer adsorbed 11.37 mg total N (TN)/g dry soil whereas the 0-3 layer adsorbed 2.13 mg TN/g dry soil. This project will also consider the effects of soil texture, soil C and N content, and Al and Fe oxide and hydroxide content.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85348", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85349" } }
{"authors":"Andrew Vitale::Desert Research Institute Reno--Charles Morton::Desert Research Institute--Justin Huntington::Desert Research Institute--Forrest Melton::California State University Monterey Bay--Alberto Guzman::California State University Monterey Bay--Daniel McEvoy::Western Regional Climate Center--", "title":"H52E-07: Development of a complete Landsat evapotranspiration and energy balance archive to support agricultural consumptive water use reporting and prediction in the Central Valley, CA", "abstract":"Mapping evapotranspiration (ET) from agricultural areas in California’s Central Valley is critical for understanding historical consumptive use of surface and groundwater. In addition, long histories of ET maps provide valuable training information for predictive studies of surface and groundwater demands. During times of drought, groundwater is commonly pumped to supplement reduced surface water supplies in the Central Valley. Due to the lack of extensive groundwater pumping records, mapping consumptive use using satellite imagery is an efficient and robust way for estimating agricultural consumptive use and assessing drought impacts. To this end, we have developed and implemented an algorithm for automated calibration of the METRIC remotely sensed surface energy balance model on NASA’s Earth Exchange (NEX) to estimate ET at the field scale. Using automated calibration techniques on the NEX has allowed for the creation of spatially explicit historical ET estimates for the Landsat archive dating from 1984 to the near present. Further, our use of spatial NLDAS and CIMIS weather data, and spatial soil water balance simulations within the NEX METRIC workflow, has helped overcome challenges of time integration between satellite image dates. This historical and near present time archive of agricultural water consumption for the Central Valley will be an extremely useful dataset for water use and drought impact reporting, and predictive analyses of groundwater demands.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85349", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85351" } }
{"authors":"Randal Jackson::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Susan Callery::NASA--", "title":"ED33C-0948: Communicating the rigor behind science results", "abstract":"Communicating the rigor behind science results NASA’s Global Climate Change website and companion Facebook page have an exceptionally large reach. Moderating the vast quantity of questions, feedback and comments from these public platforms has provided a unique perspective on the way the public views science, the scientific method and how science is funded. Email feedback and social media interactions reveal widespread misperceptions about how science is carried out: There is considerable criticism and suspicion surrounding methods of funding, and the difficulty of obtaining grants is underestimated. There appears to be limited public awareness of the peer review process. This talk will highlight the need for better communication not only of science results, but the process of science--from proposal writing and getting funded to peer-review and fundamental science terminology. As a community of science communicators, we also need to highlight the inaccuracies sometimes introduced by media reports of peer-reviewed science papers.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85351", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85352" } }
{"authors":"Camille Lagron::Stanford University--Mary Kang::Stanford University--Nicholas Riqueros::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--Robert Jackson::Stanford University--", "title":"H11B-1341: Refining Field Measurements of Methane Flux Rates from Abandoned Oil and Gas Wells", "abstract":"Recent studies in Pennsylvania demonstrate the potential for significant methane emissions from abandoned oil and gas wells. A subset of tested wells was high emitting, with methane flux rates up to seven orders of magnitude greater than natural fluxes (up to 105 mg CH4/hour, or about 2.5LPM). These wells contribute disproportionately to the total methane emissions from abandoned oil and gas wells. The principles guiding the chamber design have been developed for lower flux rates, typically found in natural environments, and chamber design modifications may reduce uncertainty in flux rates associated with high-emitting wells. Kang et al. estimate errors of a factor of two in measured values based on previous studies. We conduct controlled releases of methane to refine error estimates and improve chamber design with a focus on high-emitters. Controlled releases of methane are conducted at 0.05 LPM, 0.50 LPM, 1.0 LPM, 2.0 LPM, 3.0 LPM, and 5.0 LPM, and at two chamber dimensions typically used in field measurements studies of abandoned wells. As most sources of error tabulated by Kang et al. tend to bias the results toward underreporting of methane emissions, a flux-targeted chamber design modification can reduce error margins and/or provide grounds for a potential upward revision of emission estimates.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85352", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85353" } }
{"authors":"Richard Scott::University of St Andrews--", "title":"A33K-0343: A New Framework for the Investigation of Stratosphere-Troposphere Coupling", "abstract":"A new framework for exploring the dynamics and transport associated with stratosphere-troposphere coupling, based on dominant potential vorticity structures, is examined in a simplified dynamical model. Specifically, the framework is used here to consider the interaction between a resonant, topographically excited barotropic sudden warming and developing baroclinic lifecycles of differing characteristics. The influence of the sudden warming on details of the baroclinic development, including growth rates and low-latitude excursions of polar air, is examined under different vortex conditions including those in which the vortex splits more or less completely in the vertical, or exhibits a relatively rapid partial recovery. Extensions of the work to more comprehensive dynamical models and to include the effects of other dynamical features are considered briefly.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85353", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85354" } }
{"authors":"Michael Palace::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Franklin Sullivan::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Mark Ducey::University of New Hampshire (UNH)--Christina Herrick::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--", "title":"B53I-01: Characterizing Tropical Forest Structure using Field-based Measurements and a Terrestrial Lidar", "abstract":"Forest structure comprises numerous quantifiable components of forest biometric characteristics, one of which is tree architecture. This structural component is important in the understanding of the past and future trajectories of these biomes. Tropical forests are often considered the most structurally complex and yet least understood of forested ecosystems. New technologies have provided novel avenues for quantifying properties of forested ecosystems, one of which is LIght Detection And Ranging (lidar). This sensor can be deployed on satellite, aircraft, unmanned aerial vehicles, and terrestrial platforms. In this study we examined the efficacy of a terrestrial lidar scanner (TLS) system in a tropical forest to estimate forest structure. Our study was conducted in January 2012 at La Selva, Costa Rica at twenty locations in predominantly undisturbed forest. At these locations we collected field measured biometric attributes using a variable plot design. We also collected TLS data from the center of each plot. Using this data we developed relative vegetation profiles (RVPs) and calculated a series of parameters including entropy, FFT, number of layers and plant area index to develop statistical relationships with field data. We developed statistical models using multiple linear regressions, all of which converged on statistically significant relationships with the strongest relationship being for mean crown depth (r2 = 0.87, p < 0.01, RMSE = 1.1 m). Tree density was found to have the least strong statistical relationship (r2 = 0.45, p < 0.01, RMSE = 160.7 n ha-1). We found significant relationship between basal area and lidar metrics (r2 = 0.76, p < 0.001, RMSE = 3.68 number ha-1). Models developed for biomass 1 had a higher r-squared value and lower RMSE than that of biomass2 (biomass1: r2 = 0.7, p < 0.01, RMSE = 28.94 Mg ha-1; biomass2: r2 = 0.67, p < 0.01, RMSE = 40.62 Mg ha-1). Parameters selected in our models varied, thus indicating the potential relevance of multiple features in canopy profiles and geometry that are related to field-measured structure. Our work indicates that TLS data can provide useful information on tropical forest structure.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85354", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85355" } }
{"authors":"Matt Heavner::Los Alamos National Laboratory--Elizabeth MacDonald::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Nathan Case::Lancaster University--Sean McCloat::University of North Dakota--", "title":"SH21B-2389: The real-time state of the aurora -- a research to operations need with a citizen science solution?", "abstract":"A prototype citizen science application called Aurorasaurus has been developed and launched in 2014. The goal of this platform is crowdsourcing observations of the aurora in real-time in order to assess global visibility of the aurora for the public. Users can submit observations, verify relevant social media observations, learn about the aurora, and receive location-based alerts based on verified reports, all in near real-time. The size and distribution of the citizen scientist community around the world has tremendous potential both for documenting the visible manifestations of global space weather impacts as well as providing quality control on the reported sightings. Information with high spatial and temporal resolution of the largest, most dynamic and mysterious space weather events is made possible by this solution, and this data can be integrated with other ground and space based measures of auroral activity. We will present initial results during the large geomagnetic events of 2015 and comparison to other measures of auroral activity. Our findings indicate the prototype application can be a valuable tool for real-time aurora knowledge and should be included in discussions of real-time aurora nowcasting needs. We will discuss those needs and assess the feasibility of available systems for meeting them.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85355", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85356" } }
{"authors":"Colin Whyte::Ohio State University Main Campus--Thomas Darrah::Ohio State University Main Campus--", "title":"H11B-1342: Using Noble Gas Geochemistry to Determine the Source and Mechanism of Natural Gas Leakage into Shallow Aquifers Near Unconventional Drilling", "abstract":"Horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing have enhanced energy production but raised concerns about drinking-water contamination and other environmental impacts associated with unconventional energy development. The occurrence of fugitive gas contamination in drinking-water wells near unconventional natural gas development has been central to the debate about the environmental impacts of hydraulic fracturing, but still has a controversial origin that has variably been attributed to natural geogenic occurrences, poor well bore integrity, and crustal-scale migration of natural gas along natural deformation features. Differentiating amongst these possibilities is critical to ongoing efforts to understand the environmental implications for the presence of elevated methane and aliphatic hydrocarbons (ethane, propane, etc.) in drinking-water and a necessary step toward the development of implementable solutions that limit the occurrence of future fugitive gas events. Here we will expand upon our recent work in the Marcellus and Barnett gas fields (Jackson et al., 2013; Darrah et al., 2014; 2015) that developed noble gas techniques for distinguishing natural and anthropogenic mechanisms of natural gas migration by integrating the molecular and isotopic composition of non-hydrocarbon molecules (N2, H2S, CO2) in addition to compound specific isotopes of hydrocarbons (d2H of CH4 and d2H-C2H6 and d13C of CH4, C2H6, and C3H8) and non-hydrocarbon compounds (d15N-N2). The expanded data sets validate our initial study and support the hypothesis that a subset of drinking-water wells experience natural gas contamination following faulty well construction or poor well integrity amid a background of naturally occurring gas and salt-rich groundwater.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85356", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85357" } }
{"authors":"Shinsuke Aoki::Meiji University--Shujiro Komiya::Meiji University--Kosuke Noborio::Meiji University--Ryo Matsumoto::Meiji University--", "title":"OS31A-1971: Distribution of atmospheric CH4 concentration in eastern margin of Japan Sea from 7K14 cruises", "abstract":"Hydrate of natural gas is widely distributed in marine sediments in the eastern margin of Japan Sea. Active gas vents from the seafloor have previously been reported worldwide at gas hydrate fields. Atmospheric methane (CH4), a major component of seep gases, is an important short-lived climate pollutant. Gas seeps may contribute to increase atmospheric gas concentration above the sea surface. Our objectives were to continuously measure and investigate the distribution of the atmospheric CH4 concentration over the sea surface at the gas hydrate fields along the eastern margin of Japan Sea. We used the R/V Kaiyo-Maru No.7 (Kaiyo Engineering Co., Ltd., Japan) for the survey in Japan Sea from mid April to early June 2014. Continuous measurement of atmospheric CH4 was performed on the ship using a wave-length-scanned cavity ring-down spectrometer (WS-CRDS) (model G2201-i, Picarro Inc., USA). Air sample was collected from an air intake at the top deck (approximately 8 m above sea level) of the ship using an air pump placed in the observation room. To our experience, the ship sailed at approximately 6 knot. Location data were obtained with the nautical GPS. Observed atmospheric CH4 concentration over the sea surface was approximately between 1.8-1.9 ppm in most sea areas, but exceeds 2.0 ppm in some areas. This study was conducted as a part of the METI’s shallow gas hydrate exploration project.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85357", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85358" } }
{"authors":"David Mitchell::University of California Berkeley--Matthew Fillingim::University of California Berkeley--Robert Lillis::University of California Berkeley--Christian Mazelle::University Paul Sabatier Toulouse III--Morgane Steckiewicz::University Paul Sabatier Toulouse III--James McFadden::University of California Berkeley--John Connerney::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Laila Andersson::University of Colorado at Boulder--Janet Luhmann::University of California Berkeley--Bruce Jakosky::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--", "title":"P12A-04: STRUCTURE OF THE MARTIAN IONOSPHERE: OBSERVATIONS OF SUPRATHERMAL ELECTRONS BY MAVEN SWEA", "abstract":"The Solar Wind Electron Analyzer (SWEA) onboard the MAVEN spacecraft measures the energy and angular distributions of suprathermal (3 eV to 4.6 keV) electrons in the Mars environment. SWEA's energy resolution (ΔE/E = 17%), large field of view (80% of the sky), and 2-sec (~8-km) measurement cadence provide a detailed picture of ionospheric structure and magnetic field topology to altitudes as low as 125 km. During the first months of the mission, periapsis sampled northern latitudes from 30 to 75 degrees and altitudes down to 150 km, including the dawn and dusk terminators, the day and night hemispheres, and regions with and without significant crustal magnetic sources. The interface between the ionosphere and the overlying magnetosheath is structured and variable. When present, crustal magnetic sources can trap ionospheric plasma and significantly influence this structure. On the night hemisphere, suprathermal electrons are consistently observed down to the lowest altitudes reached by the spacecraft. Above ~200 km altitude, two sources of suprathermal electrons are observed: transport of ionospheric plasma from the day side and precipitation of electrons from the magnetotail. From 200 to 125 km altitude, the suprathermal electron density drops by more than a factor of 1000, as these electrons interact with the neutral atmosphere. At the lowest altitudes, the residual population peaks at 7 eV (see figure), where there is a local minimum in the total cross section for interaction with CO2. On the day hemisphere, the spacecraft reached altitudes as low as 140 km near the sub-solar point, close to where the photoionization and electron impact ionization rates are expected to peak. A local maximum in the 5-10-eV photoelectron flux is consistently observed at ~150 km, which is consistent with passage through this ionization rate peak.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85358", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85359" } }
{"authors":"Joonyoung Ahn::NIER National Institute of Environmental Research--", "title":"A32D-03: 2015 summertime characteristic variations of NMHCs in Seoul", "abstract":"Nonmethane hydrocarbons(NMHCs) is well known as a precursor of ozone and organic aerosols along with nitrogen oxides compounds. Recently, SOA(secondary Organic Aerosol) dominant fine particles and episodic high O3 are frequently observed throughout major cities of the East Asia, especially SMA(Seoul Metropolitan Area). Even though NMHCs play an important role in their producions, we still have great uncertainties of it’s emission, transport and chemistry. During MAPS-Seoul 2015 (Magacity Air Pollution Studies- Seoul)/KORUS-AQ(Korea-US Air Quality Study), we measured NMHCs using automated dual column/FID GC system with thermal desorption unit to address science questions both defined in KORUS-AQ and MAPS-Seoul White papers. One column was designed to separate low boiling point NMHC(C2~C6), the other for high boiling point NMHC(C7~C12). 56 NMHC compounds were measured from 18th May to 12th June, 2015 at an urban site in hill top of Korea Institute of Science and Technology campus. During the observation period, sum of NMHCs ranged from 27.6 ppbv to 54.1 ppbv. Among them, the mean concentrations of ethane was the highest (7.0 ppbv), and propane(6.7 ppbv), toluene(4.9ppbv), n-butane(3.3 ppbv) were followed. These four species represented 54% of total NMHCs concentration. The detailed behaviors of NMHC species were discussed further.  ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85359", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85360" } }
{"authors":"Kareem Omar::University of Alabama in Huntsville--Michael Briggs::University of Alabama in Huntsville--Stan Heckman::Organization Not Listed--Robert Holzworth::University of Washington Seattle Campus--", "title":"AE33A-0480: Lightning-Based Search for Terrestrial Gamma-Ray Flashes in Fermi Gamma-Ray Burst Monitor Data", "abstract":"We analyze data from the Fermi Gamma-Ray Burst Monitor (GBM) around the times of VLF radio sferics, excluding already-known Terrestrial Gamma-Ray Flashes (TGFs) and searching for any remaining TGFs in the GBM data. We use sferic signals from both the World Wide Lightning Location Network (WWLLN) and the Earth Networks Total Lightning Network (ENTLN). Similar analyses have been done with the RHESSI and ADELE gamma-ray data and WWLLN radio data (Smith et al., 2014; Albrechtsen et al., 2015). GBM gamma-ray data that is temporally near sferics within GBM’s field-of-view is corrected for time of propagation of the signal to Fermi (light travel time), time-aligned to the radio signals, and stacked for plotting. This analysis is possible on data from late 2012 onward, as this is when the GBM Continuous Time-Tagged Event datatype became fully available. At least 250,000 WWLLN strokes and 600,000 ENTLN strokes are within the field-of-view of GBM each year, even with conservative distance cutoffs. Validation of the method is achieved by a test mode in which only sferics near already-known TGFs are selected, which reveals a very strong signal. Various selections are tried for the remaining sferics, e.g., altering the distance cutoff, geographic region, etc.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85360", "section":"Atmospheric and Space Electricity"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85361" } }
{"authors":"Justin Huntington::Desert Research Institute Reno--Seshadri Rajagopal::Desert Research Institute Reno--", "title":"H21B-1373: The interplay of snow, surface water, and groundwater reservoirs for integrated water resources management", "abstract":"Changes in climate, growth in population and economy have increased the reliance on groundwater to augment supplies of surface water across the world, and especially the Western United States. Martis Valley, a high altitude, snow dominated watershed in the Sierra Nevada, California has both surface (river/reservoir) and groundwater resources that are utilized to meet demands within the valley. The recent drought and changing precipitation type (less snow, more rain) has stressed the regional surface water supply and has increased the reliance on groundwater pumping. The objective of this paper is to quantify how changes in climate and depletion of snow storage result in decreased groundwater recharge and increased groundwater use, and to assess if increased surface water storage can mitigate impacts to groundwater under historic and future climate conditions. These objectives require knowledge on the spatiotemporal distribution of groundwater recharge, discharge, and surface and groundwater interactions. We use a high resolution, physically-based integrated surface and groundwater model, GSFLOW, to identify key mechanisms that explain recent hydrologic changes in the region. The model was calibrated using a multi-criteria approach to various historical observed hydrologic fluxes (streamflow and groundwater pumping) and states (lake stage, groundwater head, snow cover area). Observations show that while groundwater use in the basin has increased significantly since the 1980’s, it still remains a relatively minor component of annual consumptive water use. Model simulations suggest that changes from snow to rain will lead to increases in Hortonian and Dunnian runoff, and decreases in groundwater recharge and discharge to streams, which could have a greater impact on groundwater resources than increased pumping. These findings highlight the necessity of an integrated approach for evaluating natural and anthropogenic impacts on surface and groundwater resources.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85361", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85362" } }
{"authors":"Srijan Aggarwal::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Philip Stewart::Montana State University--Raymond Hozalski::University of Minnesota Twin Cities--", "title":"H43G-1599: Investigating Biofilm Recalcitrance In Pipe Flow Systems", "abstract":"It is challenging to remove biofilms from pipe walls owing to their recalcitrant nature. Several physiological explanations resulting from the community existence of microbes have been offered to explain the recalcitrant nature of biofilms. Herein a biophysical aspect of biofilm recalcitrance is being reported. While optimal efficiency argument suggests that bacterial biofilms would be just strong enough to withstand the surrounding shear forces, our experimental findings reveal the biofilms to be at least 330 to 55000 times stronger. Additionally, Monte-Carlo simulations for biofilm detachment in drinking water systems were performed, which show that the existing flow velocities are insufficient for significant biofilm removal and warrant alternative detachment strategies. This emphasizes the importance of considering strategies for biofilm weakening (and subsequent detachment) in conjunction with or as an alternative to bacterial inactivation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85362", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85363" } }
{"authors":"William Waugh::Navarro Research and Engineering--Carrie Joseph::University of Arizona--Edward Glenn::University of Arizona--", "title":"H31I-1537: Uptake of Uranium and Other Elements of Concern by Plants Growing on Uranium Mill Tailings Disposal Cells", "abstract":"The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) is responsible for long-term stewardship of disposal cells for uranium mill tailings throughout the United States. Rock-armored disposal cell covers create favorable habitat for deep-rooted plants by reducing soil evaporation, increasing soil water storage, and trapping windblown dust, thereby providing water and nutrients for plant germination and establishment. DOE is studying the tradeoffs of potential detrimental and beneficial effects of plants growing on disposal cell covers to develop a rational and consistent vegetation management policy. Plant roots often extend vertically through disposal cell covers into underlying tailings, therefore, uptake of tailings contaminants and dissemination through animals foraging on stems and leaves is a possible exposure pathway. The literature shows that plant uptake of contaminants in uranium mill tailings occurs, but levels can vary widely depending on plant species, tailings and soil chemistry, and cover soil hydrology. Our empirical field study measured concentrations of uranium, radium, thorium, molybdenum, selenium, manganese, lead, and arsenic in above ground tissues harvested from plants growing on disposal cells near Native American communities in western states that represent a range of climates, cover designs, cover soil types, and vegetation types. For risk screening, contaminant levels in above ground tissues harvested from plants on disposal cells were compared to Maximum Tolerance Levels (MTLs) set for livestock by the National Research Council, and to tissue levels in the same plant species growing in reference areas near disposal cells. Although tailings were covered with uncontaminated soils, for 14 of 46 comparisons, levels of uranium and other contaminants were higher in plants growing on disposal cells compared to reference area plants, indicating possible mobilization of these elements from the tailing into plant tissues. However, with one exception, all plant levels were well below MTLs. Selenium, the only element that exceeded its MTL, likely originated in local seleniferous soil found both at reference areas and in disposal cell covers, and not in the underlying tailings. Our screening risk assessment suggests that allowing plants to grow on disposal cells appears to be safe.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85363", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85365" } }
{"authors":"Sarah Neuhaus::University of California Santa Cruz--Slawek Tulaczyk::University of California Santa Cruz--", "title":"C11A-0739: Measuring melt and velocity of Alaskan mountain glaciers using phase-sensitive radar and differential GPS", "abstract":"Alaskan glaciers show some of the highest rates of retreat worldwide, contributing to sea level rise. This retreat is due to both increased velocity and increased melt. We seek to understand the role of glacial meltwater on velocity. Matanuska glacier, a land terminating glacier in Alaska, has been well-studied using traditional glaciological techniques, but new technology has emerged that allows us to measure melt and velocity more accurately. We employed high-resolution differential GPS to create surface velocity profiles across flow in the ablation zone during the summer of 2015. We also measured surface ablation using stakes and measured basal melt using phase-sensitive radar designed by the British Antarctic Survey. The positions acquired by differential GPS are obtained to a resolution of less than 0.5m, while feature tracking using time-lapse photography for the same time period yields positions with greater and more variable uncertainty. The phase-sensitive radar provides ice thinning rates. Phase-sensitive radar together with ground penetrating radar provides us with an understanding of the internal structure of the glacier. This suite of data allows us to determine the relative importance of surface melt, basal melt, and internal deformation on ice velocity in warm mountain glaciers.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85365", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85366" } }
{"authors":"Julie Libarkin::Michigan State University--Anne Gold::CIRES/CU Boulder-Rsrch Lab 2--Sara Harris::University of British Columbia--Karen McNeal::North Carolina State University Raleigh--Ryan Bowles::Michigan State University--", "title":"ED21D-0849: Psychometric Principles in Measurement for Geoscience Education Research: A Climate Change Example", "abstract":"Understanding learning in geoscience classrooms requires that we use valid and reliable instruments aligned with intended learning outcomes. Nearly one hundred instruments assessing conceptual understanding in undergraduate science and engineering classrooms (often called concept inventories) have been published and are actively being used to investigate learning. The techniques used to develop these instruments vary widely, often with little attention to psychometric principles of measurement. This paper will discuss the importance of using psychometric principles to design, evaluate, and revise research instruments, with particular attention to the validity and reliability steps that must be undertaken to ensure that research instruments are providing meaningful measurement. An example from a climate change inventory developed by the authors will be used to exemplify the importance of validity and reliability, including the value of item response theory for instrument development. A 24-item instrument was developed based on published items, conceptions research, and instructor experience. Rasch analysis of over 1000 responses provided evidence for the removal of 5 items for misfit and one item for potential bias as measured via differential item functioning. The resulting 18-item instrument can be considered a valid and reliable measure based on pre- and post-implementation metrics. Consideration of the relationship between respondent demographics and concept inventory scores provides unique insight into the relationship between gender, religiosity, values and climate change understanding.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85366", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85367" } }
{"authors":"Lynn Kaluzienski::University of Maine Univ Maine--Gordon Hamilton::University of Maine--Peter Koons::Univ Maine--Steven Arcone::US Army Engineer Research and Development--Laura Ray::Dartmouth College--James Lever::US Army Engineer Research and Developmen--James Fastook::University of Maine--Benjamin Walker::Dartmouth College--", "title":"C11B-0754: Crevasse Extent and Lateral Shearing of the McMurdo Shear Zone, Antarctica, Using GPR and GPS Observations, and Numerical Modeling", "abstract":"Sub-ice-shelf circulation plays a fundamental role in ice shelf mass budget. The shape of the underside of an ice shelf is important, such that the presence of basal crevasses can significantly modulate the transfer of heat at the ice-ocean interface. In situ observations of basal crevasses are challenging to obtain, but surface-based ground penetrating radar (GPR) surveys can be used to determine crevasse location and orientation. Here, we use GPR methods to map the internal structures in the McMurdo Shear Zone (SZ) which marks the boundary between the Ross Ice Shelf and the slower-moving McMurdo Ice Shelf. Radar surveys with 200 MHz and 400 MHz antennas reveal the presence of crevasses both in the upper firn and within a zone of accreted marine ice at a depth of approximately 170 meters. A spatial correspondence between near-surface and basal crevasses suggests that both are formed locally by lateral shearing. A combination of three dimensional higher order and Shallow Shelf Approximation ice flow equations within the Ice Sheet System Model (ISSM) are used to test this hypothesis. This model estimates the detailed velocity field of the SZ and is constrained by GPS-derived observations of surface motion. The distribution and orientations of surface crevasses is consistent with the gradients in velocity field predicted by the model. Though a wider range of orientation angles exists for crevasses within the basal regime, the average strike angle is consistent with firn crevassing and we conclude that the marine ice coevally fractured with the firn layer.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85367", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85368" } }
{"authors":"Elizabeth Boughton::MacArthur Agro-ecology Research Center, Archbold Biological Station--Nuria Gomez-Casanovas::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Carl Bernacchi::Global Change and Photosynthesis Research Unit, Agricultural Research Service, USDA--Evan DeLucia::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Jed Sparks::Cornell University--Maria Silveira::University of Florida--Raoul Boughton::University of Florida--Hilary Swain::MacArthur Agro-ecology Research Center, Archbold Biological Station--", "title":"H53B-1668: The Subtropical Grasslands LTAR: balancing agricultural production and conservation goals", "abstract":"Subtropical grazing lands of peninsular Florida have been shaped by a long evolutionary history of lightning ignited fire followed by flooding resulting in a vast treeless prairie region in south-central Florida. In these grassland ecosystems fire return intervals are between 1-3 years. Beginning in the 1500’s, Andalusian cattle began grazing in this region and the cattle industry began in earnest in the late 1800s/early 1900s. Today, Florida’s prairie region is largely occupied by cow/calf ranch operations and also occupies the Northern Everglades watershed where water quality/quantity issues are at the forefront of environmental concerns. Florida ranches are characterized by a gradient of management intensities, ranging from sown pastures (most intensively managed) to semi-native pastures with a mix of introduced and native grasses, and rangeland (least managed ecosystem). Located at Archbold Biological Station, MacArthur Agro-ecology Research Center, and University of Florida Range Cattle Research Center (www.maerc.org; www.rcrec-ona.ifas.ufl.edu), a primary goal of the Subtropical Grasslands US Department of Agriculture Long-term Agro-Ecosystem Research LTAR is to balance intensification of sown pastures while enhancing management of native systems in a way that maximizes other ecosystem services (regulating, supporting, cultural, biodiversity). Here, we describe our proposed experimental design to compare ecosystem delivery from conventional and aspirational management regimes in sown pastures and native systems. Aspirational management goals are to (i) maximize productivity in sown pastures with a neutral effect on other ecosystem services, and (ii) manage native systems in a way that maximizes regulating, supporting, and biodiversity ecosystem services by utilizing patch burn grazing. Ultimately, we will determine if enhanced production in sown pasture under the aspirational management system can offset any reduction in productivity in semi-native/native systems managed for services other than production. Cross-site analyses with other LTAR sites are planned to assess energy balance and gas exchange in croplands of the southeastern U.S. and to compare controlling factors and processes across humid, subtropical and sub-humid continental beef-grazing systems.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85368", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85369" } }
{"authors":"Lucy Marshall::University of New South Wales--Tyler Smith::Clarkson University--Lennox To::University of New South Wales--", "title":"H23E-1627: Catchment Classification via Hydrologic Modeling: Evaluating the Relative Importance of Model Selection, Parameterization and Classification Techniques", "abstract":"Classification has emerged as an important tool for evaluating the runoff generating mechanisms in catchments and for providing a basis on which to group catchments having similar characteristics. These methods are particularly important for transferring models from one catchment to another in the case of data scarce regions or paired catchment studies .In many cases, the goal of catchment classification is to be able to identify models or parameter sets that could be applied to similar catchments for predictive purposes. A potential impediment to this goal is the impact of error in both the classification technique and the hydrologic model. In this study, we examine the relationship between catchment classification, hydrologic models, and model parameterizations for the purpose of transferring models between similar catchments. Building on previous work using a data set of over 100 catchments from south-east Australia, we identify several hydrologic model structures and calibrate each model for each catchment. We use clustering to identify groups of catchments with similar hydrologic response (as characterized through the calibrated model parameters). We examine the dependency of the clustered catchment groups on the pre-selected model, the uncertainty in the calibrated model parameters, and the clustering or classification algorithm. Further, we investigate the relationship between the catchment clusters and certain catchment physical characteristics or signatures, which are more typically used for catchment classification. Overall, our work is aimed at elucidating the potential sources of uncertainty in catchment classification, and the utility of classification for improving hydrologic predictions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85369", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85370" } }
{"authors":"Nicole Kinsman::NOAA National Ocean Service--Jacquelyn Overbeck::Alaska Division of Geological and Geophysical Surveys--", "title":"EP23A-0936: Which comes first in the U.S. Arctic – the tidal datum or the shoreline position?", "abstract":"The U.S. arctic coast extends more than 50,000 km (tidally-influenced, 1:63,360 scale) along the Arctic Ocean (1 active tide station), Beaufort, Bearing and Chukchi Seas (3 stations), and includes the Aleutian Island Chain (5 stations). The best available vector that defines this regulatory, ecological and navigational boundary is a compilation of Mean High Water (MHW) features that have been visually interpreted from satellite or aerial imagery. Despite documented rates of rapid shoreline change in the arctic, the vast linear extent, remoteness, and limited ice-free season create unique challenges in maintaining an updated shoreline vector for the Alaska coast; this is compounded by a lack of high resolution digital elevation models (DEMs) and topography of the sea surface grids to conduct datum-derived shoreline mapping using elevation-intercept techniques widely employed elsewhere. Best-available shoreline positions in arctic Alaska span a wide temporal range with 32% dating from before statehood (1959), 33% from 1960-2010, 16% of unknown age, and only 19% of the total extent has been mapped since 2010. We present a hybrid approach to update shoreline vectors that uses co-registered orthoimagery and DEMs to obtain a local MHW tidal datum approximation by sampling the average elevation along a manually-digitized High Water Line (HWL) segment and applying appropriate corrections for beach slope and local wave climate. This elevation is used to conduct an automated, elevation-based shoreline extraction in the immediate vicinity of the sample and the process is iteratively repeated in segments along the coast. Preliminary results suggest that shoreline vectors derived in this manner are comparable to existing, contemporary MHW vectors (< 4 m horizontal offset in low-grade coastal environments); this technique can accelerate map updates and also produces a more repeatable shoreline position in data-sparse regions that are undergoing rapid change. Furthermore, by exploiting known relationships between HWL and the MHW datum (proxy-datum bias corrections), we can provide tidal to geodetic datum conversion approximations to areas without water level records for use in preliminary inundation modeling and coastal flood decision support.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85370", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85371" } }
{"authors":"Caitlin Bojanowski::University of Dayton--Christopher Trivedi::Colorado School of Mines--Leslie Daille::Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile--James Bradley::University of Bristol--Hope Johnson::California State University Fullerton--Blake Stamps::University of Oklahoma Norman Campus--Bradley Stevenson::University of Oklahoma Norman Campus--William Berelson::University of Southern California--Frank Corsetti::University of Southern California--John Spear::Colorado School of Mines--", "title":"B21C-0445: Vertical Microbial Community Variability of Carbonate-based Cones may Provide Insight into Formation in the Rock Record", "abstract":"Stromatolite morphogenesis is poorly understood, and the process by which microbial mats become mineralized is a primary question in microbialite formation. Ancient conical stromatolites are primarily carbonate-based whereas the few modern analogues in hot springs are either non-mineralized or mineralized by silica. A team from the 2015 International GeoBiology Course investigated carbonate-rich microbial cones from near Little Hot Creek (LHC), Long Valley Caldera, California, to investigate how conical stromatolites might form in a hot spring carbonate system. The cones are up to 3 cm tall and are found in a calm, ~45° C pool near LHC that is 4 times super-saturated with respect to CaCO3. The cones rise from a flat, layered microbial mat at the edge of the pool. Scanning electron microscopy revealed filamentous bacteria associated with calcite crystals within the cone tips. Preliminary 16S rRNA gene analysis indicated variability of community composition between different vertical levels of the cone. The cone tip had comparatively greater abundance of filamentous cyanobacteria (Leptolyngbya and Phormidium) and fewer heterotrophs (e.g. Chloroflexi) compared to the cone bottom. This supports the hypothesis that cone formation may depend on the differential abundance of the microbial community and their potential functional roles. Metagenomic analyses of the cones revealed potential genes related to chemotaxis and motility. Specifically, a genomic bin identified as a member of the genus Isosphaera contained an hmp chemotaxis operon implicated in gliding motility in the cyanobacterium Nostoc punctiforme [1]. Isosphaera is a Planctomycete shown to have phototactic capabilities [2], and may play a role in conjunction with cyanobacteria in the vertical formation of the cones. This analysis of actively growing cones indicates a complex interplay of geochemistry and microbiology that form structures which can serve as models for processes that occurred in the past and are preserved in the rock record. References: [1] Risser, D.D. et al. (2013) Molecular Microbiology, 87(4), 884-893. [2] Giovannoni, S.J. et al. (1987) Archives of Microbiology, 147(3), 276-284.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85371", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85372" } }
{"authors":"Dylan Garcia::University of New Mexico Main Campus--Peter Fawcett::University of New Mexico Main Campus--R Scott Anderson::Northern Arizona University--Zachary Sharp::University of New Mexico Main Campus--", "title":"PP13C-2298: Paleomonsoonal Precipitation and Hydroclimate Variability from Glacial to Interglacial Climates in the Southwest: The Stoneman Lake, Arizona Record", "abstract":"Oxygen isotope values from diatom silica have been used to determine past hydrological conditions in a variety of settings including differentiating summer monsoonal paleoprecipitation from winter frontal paleoprecipitation in the American southwest. Lacustrine cores from the Valles Caldera, New Mexico, show a distinct change in silica oxygen isotope values from glacial to interglacial as a switch from a purely winter frontal precipitation during the glacial to a mix of winter frontal and summer monsoonal precipitation during the interglacial. A relatively large (ca. 20‰) and rapid increase in δ18O following the glacial termination implies an abrupt onset of the North American monsoon. We plan to elaborate on this research to see if this is true elsewhere in the southwest. Two lacustrine sediment cores (70 m deep and 30 m deep respectively) were recovered from Stoneman Lake, northern Arizona in October of 2014. With these cores we plan to determine regional hydroclimate variability between the Pleistocene-Holocene glacial transition ca. 14 ka. Oxygen isotope analysis from diatom silica will allow us to determine past sources of precipitation to the basin (Gulf of Mexico vs North Pacific), and paleoprecipitation variability. In conjunction with other proxies, we can determine if the onset of paleomonsoonal precipitation in central Arizona occurs immediately after the glacial termination as in NM, or if there is some component of monsoonal precipitation during the late glacial period. Diatom sampling was performed at approximately every 50 cm. To purify the diatoms, the samples are chemically and physically separated. The step wise fluorination and laser ablation technique are then applied to remove water & hydroxyl groups and to extract O2 & SiF4 respectively. If results from the Stoneman Lake core are similar to that of the Valles Caldera core, we should expect to see a nearly 20‰ increase in δ18Olake water. This would suggest a: 1) collapse of the summer monsoon in this region, 2) southward shift of the southern polar front jet stream, 3) low ratio of evaporation compared to total water outflow from the lake. By collecting data from this lacustrine sediment, we will be able to better reconstruct atmospheric paleocirculation patterns of the southwestern United States.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85372", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85373" } }
{"authors":"Christopher Francis::Stanford University--", "title":"B11E-0487: Linking Nitrogen-Cycling Microbial Communities to Environmental Fluctuations and Biogeochemical Activity in a Large, Urban Estuary: the San Francisco Bay-Delta", "abstract":"Nitrogen (N) availability is an important factor controlling productivity and thus carbon cycling in estuaries. The fate of N in estuaries depends on the activities of the microbes that carry out the N-cycle, which in turn depend on factors such as organic matter availability, dissolved inorganic N, salinity, oxygen, and temperature. Key microbial N transformations include nitrification (the aerobic oxidation of ammonia to nitrite and nitrate) and denitrification (the anaerobic reduction of nitrate to dinitrogen gas). While denitrification leads to N loss, nitrification is the only link between reduced N (produced by decomposition) and oxidized N (substrates for N loss processes), and both processes are known to produce nitrous oxide (N2O), a potent greenhouse gas. Understanding controls of N-cycling in the San Francisco Bay-Delta (SFBD)—the largest estuary on the west coast of North America—is particularly important, as this urban estuary is massively polluted with N, even compared to classic “eutrophic” systems. Interestingly, the SFBD has been spared the detrimental consequences of nutrient enrichment, largely due to high suspended sediment concentrations (and thus low light penetration) throughout the water column, combined with high grazing pressure. However, the recent “clearing” of SFBD waters due to a sharp decrease in suspended sediments may significantly alter the ecology of the estuary, by increasing phytoplankton growth. Thus, the SFBD may be losing its historical resilience to eutrophication, and may soon be “high-nutrient, low-chlorophyll” no more. Elucidating the environmental factors affecting the community structure, activity, and functioning of N-cycling microbes in SFBD is crucial for determining how changes in turbidity and productivity will be propagated throughout the ecosystem. While substantial ecological research in the SFBD has focused on phytoplankton and food webs, bacterial and archaeal communities have received far less attention. Using a combination of molecular, biogeochemical, and ‘omics’ approaches, we have been examining how N-cycling microbial communities throughout the SFBD change in relation to environmental fluctuations—a critical step in understanding how microbial populations drive biogeochemical cycling in this estuary.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85373", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85375" } }
{"authors":"Christopher Bosma::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--Jessica Moerman::Georgia Inst. of Technology--Kim Cobb::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--", "title":"PP11B-2238: Water Isotope Variability Across Individual Precipitation Events in Borneo", "abstract":"The composition of hydrogen and oxygen isotopes in rainwater (measured as δ18O and δD) provides vital information about current hydrological dynamics, and forms the basis for many paleoclimate reconstructions of hydroclimate variability. However, many factors – both local and remote – govern water isotope fractionation, complicating the interpretation of water isotope records. While Raleigh distillation serves as a key first-order driver of the well-noted “amount effect”, post-condensation evaporative processes are an important influence on intra-event isotope variations (e.g. Moerman, et al. 2013). To further resolve the processes driving this variability, rainwater isotopes from Gunung Mulu National Park in northern Borneo (4°N, 115 °E) were analyzed at one-minute intervals across nine rain events in 2012. To assess the influence of large-scale, remote fractionation processes versus those that act locally, our intra-event time series was compared to daily-resolved isotope records over the same time interval. We quantify a large range of water isotopic compositions over the sampling period (-13.1‰ to 0.2‰ in δ18O and -88.3‰ to -1.2‰ in δD). There is appreciable evidence for evaporative enrichment at our site, with δ18O vs. δD slopes significantly less than eight – the slope of the Global Meteoric Water Line. Large differences in the shape of the intra-event profile, ranging from monotonically increasing to “V-shaped” (e.g. Celle-Jeanton, et al. 2004) to monotonically decreasing isotopic values indicate that different precipitation regimes have a profound impact on water isotope evolution through a precipitation event. As such, we use a suite of meteorological data including in-situ observations, satellite imagery, model reanalysis from the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), and NOAA HYSPLIT water vapor back-trajectories to provide an interpretive framework for the observed intra-event isotopic variability. Our study demonstrates the utility of investigating the relationships between small-scale, local rainwater isotopic compositions and large-scale regional weather and climate patterns for resolving key dynamical processes driving tropical convection, in both the present and the past.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85375", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85377" } }
{"authors":"Jonathan Tytell::University of California San Diego--Frank Vernon::University of California San Diego--Juan Reyes::University of California San Diego--", "title":"S51C-2687: A Database of Tornado Events as Perceived by the USArray Transportable Array Network", "abstract":"Over the course of the deployment of Earthscope’s USArray Transportable Array (TA) network there have numerous tornado events that have occurred within the changing footprint of its network. The Array Network Facility based in San Diego, California, has compiled a database of these tornado events based on data provided by the NOAA Storm Prediction Center (SPC). The SPC data itself consists of parameters such as start-end point track data for each event, maximum EF intensities, and maximum track widths. Our database is Antelope driven and combines these data from the SPC with detailed station information from the TA network. We are now able to list all available TA stations during any specific tornado event date and also provide a single calculated “nearest” TA station per individual tornado event. We aim to provide this database as a starting resource for those with an interest in investigating tornado signatures within surface pressure and seismic response data. On a larger scale, the database may be of particular interest to the infrasound research community", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85377", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85378" } }
{"authors":"Yoshifumi Kawada::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--Makoto Yamano::University of Tokyo--", "title":"T21E-2891: Hydrothermal Heat Transport within an Abruptly Formed Permeable Slot: An Application to Heat Flow Peaks Observed at the Japan Trench Offshore of Sanriku", "abstract":"Anomalous heat flow has been observed within 150 km seaward of the trench axis at the Japan Trench offshore of Sanriku, northeast Japan [Yamano et al., 2008, 2014]. The average heat flow is ~70 mW/m2 (50 mW/m2 is expected for the plate age), and small-scale (2 to 3 km) variations, whose peak value is >100 mW/m2, are embedded. In the area of high heat flow, a high Vp/Vs layer in the oceanic crust has been detected [Fujie et al., 2013]. The layer thickness is increased toward the trench axis. Fujie et al.[2013] interpreted this layer as a result of fracturing due to bending of the subducting plate. This layer may work as an aquifer in which heat is transported by fluid circulation. In a previous study [Kawada et al., 2014], we constructed a model for aquifer thickening in order to explain the observed anomalous heat flow: a 500-m-thick aquifer 150 km seaward of the trench axis is gradually thickened to 3000 m toward the trench axis. We found that hydrothermal circulation within the thickening aquifer mines heat beneath its underlying part, and heat flow is elevated accordingly. Although the model can explain the observed high heat flow in an average sense, the origin of the small-scale heat flow variations remains to be solved. This study expands the previous model by incorporating abrupt thickening of the aquifer to account for the small-scale heat flow. Typically, we consider a situation in which a permeable slot of 2000 m wide and 3000 m deep suddenly appears. This model results in a high heat flow peak of 100 mW/m2 above the permeable slot, which persists over hundreds of thousand years. Heat outside the slot is transported horizontally toward the slot by thermal conduction and then is transported vertically due to hydrothermal circulation within the slot. Because the volume of the permeable slot is smaller than its surrounding region, high heat flow above the slot lasts for a long time.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85378", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85379" } }
{"authors":"Matthew Borchers::Oregon State University--Frederick Colwell::Oregon State University--Grace D'Angelo::Oregon State University--Andrew Thurber::Oregon State University--Michael Graw::Oregon State University--", "title":"B11I-0565: Sediment Interfaces: Ecotones on a Microbial Scale", "abstract":"Ecotones – transitions between different biomes - often support greater faunal diversity than the adjacent ecological systems. For subseafloor microorganisms, defined geological and chemical gradients have been shown to affect population sizes and community structure, but the role that sediment interfaces play is still unclear. Here, we test the hypothesis that zones of transition between two distinct sediment types increase microbial diversity and change community composition. Concurrently, we explore those factors that drive deep-subsurface microbial community structure (e.g., depth, interstitial water chemistry, methane concentrations, clay content). Samples from IODP Expedition 349 - South China Sea Tectonics – had interfaces of either ash/clay or turbidite/clay boundaries sampled , DNA extracted, and the 16S rRNA gene analyzed on an Illumina MiSeq platform. Initial analyses reveal that microbial communities in sediment samples are distinct from communities in drilling fluid, indicating that contamination is unlikely. In four of the eight complete interfaces currently analyzed we found an increase in diversity (based on the chao1 index), in certain cases doubling the diversity of the adjacent rock types. The pattern was not uniform across all interfaces. While some posit that ecotones provide a mixing of the two adjacent communities, we were surprised to find an abundance (mean = 392 OTUs) of unique microbial taxa within the ecotone itself when compared to adjacent sediment (mean=282 unique OTUs). Thus while diversity was not uniformly increased in ecotones, the interface led to divergent microbial communities that were not simply mixtures of those adjacent. We will discuss the ability of abiotic factors in explaining the among ecotone variance that we observed. Our investigation helps to characterize the factors that drive microbial community structure of the subseafloor while highlighting the need to focus on habitat heterogeneity at a scale pertinent to bacteria and archaea in studies of microbial ecology.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85379", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85380" } }
{"authors":"Laura Perez::University of California Berkeley--Ebelin Martinez::University of California Berkeley--Federico Matias::University of California Berkeley--Elvira Rivera Soto::University of California Berkeley--Kmahjanay McDonald::University of California Berkeley--Deisy Garcia::University of California Berkeley--Itzel Ruiz::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"ED41A-0848: GIS Spatial Analysis of Water Quality at Courtland Creek in Oakland, California", "abstract":"Courtland Creek is a channelized stream that traverses residential and industrial sections of East Oakland, California. Segments of the creek are exposed on the surface and have been designated as City of Oakland park land. Since 2012, the quality of creek waters has been monitored through measurement and analysis of nutrient and other possible contaminant levels in samples collected in these exposed segments. Throughout the three-year period during which monitoring efforts have been undertaken, high concentration levels of nitrate have been observed. The primary aim of our research is to gain an overall indication of creek health in relation to its surrounding environment through the use of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) analysis of nutrient concentrations at the four sites. Investigating the relationship between Courtland Creek and the environmental factors influencing its health will enable us to develop a better sense of the actions that can be taken by the City of Oakland to create sustainable park land and healthy communities. During the summer of 2015, our group continued to monitor levels of ammonia, phosphate and nitrate at four different sites along the creek, and benthic macroinvertebrates were sampled at one of these sites. Preliminary analysis of benthic macroinvertebrate data indicates that Courtland Creek is in poor health ecologically. Nitrate concentration levels measured during the study period were lower than those detected in previous years but still indicate inputs other than those associated with natural processes. The high nitrate concentration levels may be the result of human and animal waste pollution, as supported by data obtained during a recent Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) - led E. coli survey that included the watershed within which Courtland Creek is situated.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85380", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85381" } }
{"authors":"Guang Yang::Stanford University--Katharine Maher::Stanford University--Jef Caers::Stanford Earth Sciences--", "title":"H31I-1555: Sensitivity of geological, geochemical and hydrologic parameters in complex reactive transport systems for in-situ uranium bioremediation", "abstract":"Groundwater contamination associated with remediated uranium mill tailings is a challenging environmental problem, particularly within the Colorado River Basin. To examine the effectiveness of in-situ bioremediation of U(VI), acetate injection has been proposed and tested at the Rifle pilot site. There have been several geologic modeling and simulated contaminant transport investigations, to evaluate the potential outcomes of the process and identify crucial factors for successful uranium reduction. Ultimately, findings from these studies would contribute to accurate predictions of the efficacy of uranium reduction. However, all these previous studies have considered limited model complexities, either because of the concern that data is too sparse to resolve such complex systems or because some parameters are assumed to be less important. Such simplified initial modeling, however, limits the predictive power of the model. Moreover, previous studies have not yet focused on spatial heterogeneity of various modeling components and its impact on the spatial distribution of the immobilized uranium (U(IV)). In this study, we study the impact of uncertainty on 21 parameters on model responses by means of recently developed distance-based global sensitivity analysis (DGSA), to study the main effects and interactions of parameters of various types. The 21 parameters include, for example, spatial variability of initial uranium concentration, mean hydraulic conductivity, and variogram structures of hydraulic conductivity. DGSA allows for studying multi-variate model responses based on spatial and non-spatial model parameters. When calculating the distances between model responses, in addition to the overall uranium reduction efficacy, we also considered the spatial profiles of the immobilized uranium concentration as target response. Results show that the mean hydraulic conductivity and the mineral reaction rate are the two most sensitive parameters with regard to the overall uranium reduction. But in terms of spatial distribution of immobilized uranium, initial conditions of uranium concentration and spatial uncertainty in hydraulic conductivity also become important. These analyses serve as the first step of further prediction practices of the complex uranium transport and reaction systems.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85381", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85382" } }
{"authors":"Patrick Alexander::NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies CUNY City College--Lora Koenig::National Snow and Ice Data Center--Rajashree Datta::CUNY Graduate Center CUNY City College--Marco Tedesco::Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory, Columbia University CUNY City College--Peter Kuipers Munneke::Utrecht University--Stefan Ligtenberg::Utrecht University--Xavier Fettweis::University of Liège--Michiel van den Broeke::Utrecht University--", "title":"C23C-0809: Snow and firn density variability on the Greenland and Antarctic Ice Sheets from observations, the MAR regional climate model, and the RACMO firn model", "abstract":"The density of snow and firn of the Greenland and Antarctic Ice Sheets (GrIS and AIS) is an important parameter in ice sheet surface mass balance (SMB). Snow and firn densities are needed to convert satellite- and airborne-derived snow thickness changes into surface mass changes. Moreover, density directly impacts SMB by influencing the amount of liquid water that can be stored in firn and snow at the ice sheet surface. Using recently updated density profiles from the SUMup community dataset, we examine spatial and temporal variations in measured densities over the GrIS and AIS, and evaluate modeled profiles from the Modèle Atmosphérique Régionale (MAR) RCM and the firn model of the Regional Atmospheric Climate Model (RACMO2). The MAR model tends to underestimate densities in the first meter of the snowpack over both ice sheets, although the biases are spatially variable. We provide results regarding the relationship between modeled biases and parameters such as the time and location of the sample profile, and climatology at the profile location. We also explore whether recent increases in surface air temperature and melting over the Greenland ice have led to changes in simulated density profiles.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85382", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85383" } }
{"authors":"Gurjot Singh::Indian Institute of Science--", "title":"B51F-0493: Eutrophic lakes as CO2 sinks – A survey of 19 lakes in India", "abstract":"Inland waters emit a substantial amount of CO2 every year, most recent syntheses estimate (Raymond et al. 2013, IPCC 2013). However, eutrophic water bodies, which constitute the majority of inland waters, are underrepresented in these syntheses and may absorb rather than emit CO2 because of their high productivity (Balmer and Downing 2011, Pacheco et al. 2013). We did a survey of 19 urban and peri-urban lakes in India across a wide range of climates and with varying levels of eutrophication to get a snapshot of lake air-water CO2 exchange. A majority of the lakes (12 out of 19) were undersaturated with CO2 during daytime. Surface water pCO2 varied from 26 to 4600 ppm. Using estimates of gas transfer velocity from two different methods, we found the average daytime flux of CO2 in these lakes to vary from -3.11 mg C m-2d-1 to 36 mg C m-2 d-1. Weighted-averages of pCO2 and flux using lake area were 692 ppm and 2.33 mg C m-2 d-1, respectively. However, these values were dominated by one large coastal lake that was saturated with CO2. The other 18 lakes yielded averages pCO2 and flux of 282 ppm and -0.65 mg C m-2 d-1. Eutrophication is one the biggest contemporary threats to the global freshwater supply, and is particularly severe in developing countries. This study, despite its limited scope, provides strong support to the fact that eutrophic lakes may act as CO2 sinks rather than sources. Follow-up studies on the diurnal and seasonal pCO2 trends and the metabolic characteristics of these lakes will reveal the determinants of their carbon metabolism.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85383", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85384" } }
{"authors":"Erika Podest::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Kyle McDonald::CUNY City College--Katherine Jensen::CUNY Graduate Center--Ronny Schroeder::CUNY City College--", "title":"H51N-1599: Characterizing Open Water Bodies and Wetland Ecosystems Using Optical and Microwave Remote Sensing", "abstract":"Inundated vegetation and open water bodies are common features across the landscape and exert major impacts on hydrologic processes and surface-atmosphere carbon exchange. Their carbon emissions can have a large impact on global climate. It is therefore of great importance to assess their spatial extent and temporal variations in order to improve upon carbon balance estimates. Despite their importance in the global cycling of carbon and water and climate forecasting, they remain poorly characterized and modeled, primarily because of the scarcity of suitable regional-to-global remote sensing data for characterizing wetlands distribution and dynamics. Spaceborne microwave sensors are an effective tool for characterizing these ecosystems since they are sensitive to surface water and vegetation structure, and they can monitor large areas on a temporal basis regardless of atmospheric conditions or solar illumination. Optical sensors however provide much higher spatial resolution as well as information on water color. We developed a methodology using data from the Advanced Land Observing Satellite (ALOS) Phased Array L-Band Synthetic Aperture Radar (PALSAR) to map wetland ecosystems at 100 meter resolution for target regions as well as SMAP radar data at 1 km resolution. We also used optical data from Landsat to map open water bodies and their color properties at 15 meter resolution. Inundation dynamics of these ecosystems was assessed using a coarser resolution, 25 km microwave product on surface water fraction, which was derived using combined active and passive microwave data from QuikSCAT and AMSR-E on a weekly basis. We compare information content and accuracy of the coarse resolution products to the PALSAR, SMAP and Landsat based datasets to ensure information harmonization. The combination of high and low resolution datasets will allow for characterization of wetlands and open water bodies and assessment of their flooding status. This work has been undertaken partly within the framework of the JAXA ALOS Kyoto & Carbon Initiative. PALSAR data have been provided by JAXA/EORC. Portions of this work were carried out at City University of New York and JPL, Caltech, under contract with NASA.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85384", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85385" } }
{"authors":"Victoria Nelson::Northwestern University--Ritesh Sharma::Oregon State University--Eugene Zhang::Oregon State University--Andreas Schmittner::Oregon State University--Bernhard Jenny::Oregon State University--", "title":"IN53A-1832: 3D Visualization of Global Ocean Circulation", "abstract":"Advanced 3D visualization techniques are seldom used to explore the dynamic behavior of ocean circulation. Streamlines are an effective method for visualization of flow, and they can be designed to clearly show the dynamic behavior of a fluidic system. We employ vector field editing and extraction software to examine the topology of velocity vector fields generated by a 3D global circulation model coupled to a one-layer atmosphere model simulating preindustrial and last glacial maximum (LGM) conditions. This results in a streamline-based visualization along multiple density isosurfaces on which we visualize points of vertical exchange and the distribution of properties such as temperature and biogeochemical tracers. Previous work involving this model examined the change in the energetics driving overturning circulation and mixing between simulations of LGM and preindustrial conditions. This visualization elucidates the relationship between locations of vertical exchange and mixing, as well as demonstrates the effects of circulation and mixing on the distribution of tracers such as carbon isotopes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85385", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85386" } }
{"authors":"John Murray::Fordham University--Steven Schill::University of California San Diego--Sean Freeman::Florida State University--Timothy Bertram::University of Wisconsin Madison--Barry Lefer::NASA Headquarters--", "title":"A51N-0282: Vertical Transport of Aerosol Particles across Mountain Topography near the Los Angeles Basin", "abstract":"Transport of aerosol particles is known to affect air quality and is largely dependent on the characteristic topography of the surrounding region. To characterize this transport, aerosol number distributions were collected with an Ultra-High Sensitivity Aerosol Spectrometer (UHSAS, DMT) during the 2015 NASA Student Airborne Research Program (SARP) in and around the Los Angeles Basin in Southern California. Increases in particle number concentration and size were observed over mountainous terrain north of Los Angeles County. Chemical analysis and meteorological lagrangian trajectories suggest orographic lifting processes, known as the ` chimney effect` . Implications for spatial transport and distribution will be discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85386", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85387" } }
{"authors":"Christopher Fisher::Washington State University--John Hanchar::Memorial University of Newfoundland--Calvin Miller::Vanderbilt Univ--Stacy Phillips::Memorial University of Newfoundland--Jeffrey Vervoort::Washington State University--Whitehouse Martin::Swedish Museum of Natural History--", "title":"V23B-3140: Nd Isotope and U-Th-Pb Age Mapping of Single Monazite Grains by Laser Ablation Split Stream Analysis", "abstract":"Monazite is a common accessory mineral that occurs in medium to high grade metamorphic and Ca-poor felsic igneous rocks, and often controls the LREE budget (including Sm and Nd) of the host rock in which it crystallizes. Moreover, it contains appreciable U and Th, making it an ideal mineral for determining U-Th-Pb ages and Sm-Nd isotopic compositions, both of which are readily determined using in situ techniques with very high spatial resolution like LA-MC-ICPMS. Here, we present the results of laser ablation split stream analyses (LASS), which allows for simultaneous determination of the age and initial Nd isotopic composition in a single analysis. Analyses were done using a 20mm laser spot that allowed for detailed Nd isotope mapping of monazite grains (~30 analyses per ~250mm sized grain). Combined with LREE ratios (e.g., Sm/Nd, Ce/Gd, and Eu anomalies) these results yield important petrogenetic constraints on the evolution of peraluminous granites from the Old Woman-Piute batholith in southeastern California. Our findings also allow an improved understanding of the causes of isotope heterogeneity in granitic rocks. U-Th-Pb age mapping across the crystals reveals a single Cretaceous age for all grains with precision and accuracy typical of laser ablation analyses (~2%). In contrast, the concurrent Nd isotope mapping yields homogeneous initial Nd isotope compositions for some grains and large initial intra-grain variations of up to 8 epsilon units in others. The grains that yield homogeneous Nd isotope compositions have REE ratios suggesting that they crystallized in a fractionally crystallizing magma. Conversely, other grains, which also record fractional crystallization of both feldspar and LREE rich minerals, demonstrate a change in the Nd isotope composition of the magma during crystallization of monazite. Comparison of inter- and intra-grain Nd isotope compositions reveals further details on the potential mechanisms responsible for isotope heterogeneity present in single rock samples. This method highlights the potential of single grain isotope mapping of LREE phases such as monazite, allanite, and titanite for understanding both igneous and metamorphic petrogenesis.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85387", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85388" } }
{"authors":"Jason Schroeder::University of California Irvine--James Crawford::NASA Langley Research Center--Armin Wisthaler::University of Oslo--Alan Fried::University of Colorado at Boulder--Donald Blake::University of California Irvine--Andrew Weinheimer::National Center for Atmospheric Research--", "title":"A21A-0025: Analysis of Variability in Formaldehyde and Ozone Column Densities", "abstract":"Recent analysis of data collected during the DISCOVER-AQ field campaign has shown a strong correlation between lower-tropospheric integrated column densities of formaldehyde (HCHO) and ozone (O3). In order for this knowledge to be applicable to the monitoring of near-surface pollution from satellites, further analysis must be undertaken to understand variability in this relationship as the length of the vertical column is changed (for example, is the correlation still evident if we use total tropospheric columns?). Proposed analysis will use in-situ measurements of HCHO and O3 collected onboard the NASA P-3B and varying column depths to investigate this trend. This will necessitate an accurate approximation of the boundary layer height, as nearly all of the HCHO vertical column is contained therein. VOCs measured at surface sites during the California and Colorado employments will be used to analyze the contribution of different emissions sources over these study regions, which may provide valuable insight into variabilities into the HCHO/O3 column relationship. Furthermore, surface measurements of HCHO were taken at one site in Colorado, and will be used to analyze variability in the surface-column relationship for HCHO. An accurate understanding of the variabilities in these trends (i.e. the relationship between HCHO and O3 columns, the relationship between column densities and the contribution of different emission sources, and the surface-column relationship for HCHO) in the four DISCOVER-AQ study regions (Maryland, Houston, California, and Colorado) will provide insight into how effective HCHO could potentially be in understanding surface pollution during different seasons and under different atmospheric composition regimes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85388", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85391" } }
{"authors":"Evan Variano::University of California Berkeley--Luca Brandt::KTH Royal Institute of Technology--Mehdi Ardekani::KTH Royal Institute of Technology--Lee Karp-Boss::University of Maine--Nimish Pujara::Cornell University University of California Berkeley--", "title":"B23D-0632: Turbulent alterations to net settling rate of non-spherical particles", "abstract":"The rate at which particles sediment out of the surface mixed layer is a major control on carbon flux in the ocean. Turbulence can change the rate at which particles escape the mixed layer but mechanisms and magnitude of effects are not well understood for aquatic particles. Here we use a 3-pronged approach to study turbulence affects on sedimentation rates of non-spherical, marine-like particles. First, we apply an orientation-based kinematic model to track particles through turbulent flow. We then use a complex numerical model that solves the dynamical equation of motion for non-spherical particles embedded in turbulent flow. Finally we use a novel 3D particle-tracking tool to measure trajectories of diatoms in a turbulent flow and test predictions from numerical models. At the time of writing, preliminary results from numerical simulations indicate turbulent-altered settling for elongated (rod-shaped) particles at size, mass, and shapes similar to those measured for marine phytoplankton.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85391", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85392" } }
{"authors":"Alex Hernsdorf::University of California Berkeley--Yuki Amano::JAEA Japan Atomic Energy Agency--Yohey Suzuki::University of Tokyo--Kotaro Ise::JAEA Japan Atomic Energy Agency--Brian Thomas::University of California Berkeley--Jillian Banfield::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"B11J-0578: ANME-2D Archaea Catalyze Methane Oxidation in Deep Subsurface Sediments Independent of Nitrate Reduction", "abstract":"Terrestrial sediments are an important global reservoir for methane. Microorganisms in the deep subsurface play a critical role in the methane cycle, yet much remains to be learned about their diversity and metabolisms. To provide more comprehensive insight into the microbiology of the methane cycle in the deep subsurface, we conducted a genome-resolved study of samples collected from the Horonobe Underground Research Laboratory (HURL), Japan. Groundwater samples were obtained from three boreholes from a depth range of between 140 m and 250 m in two consecutive years. Groundwater was filtered and metagenomic DNA extracted and sequenced, and the sequence data assembled. Based on the sequences of phylogenetically informative genes on the assembled fragments, we detected a high degree of overlap in community composition across a vertical transect within one borehole at the two sampling times. However, there was comparatively little similarity observed among communities across boreholes. Spatial and temporal abundance patterns were used in combination with tetranucleotide signatures of assembled genome fragments to bin the data and reconstruct over 200 unique draft genomes, of which 137 are considered to be of high quality (>90% complete). The deepest samples from one borehole were highly dominated by an archaeon identified as ANME-2D; this organism was also present at lower abundance in all other samples from that borehole. Also abundant in these microbial communities were novel members of the Gammaproteobacteria, Saccharibacteria (TM7) and Tenericute phyla. Notably, a ~2 Mbp draft genome for the ANME-2D archaeon was reconstructed. As expected, the genome encodes all of the genes predicted to be involved in the reverse methanogenesis pathway. In contrast with the previously reported ANME2-D genome, the HURL ANME-2D genome lacks the capacity to reduce nitrate. However, we identified many multiheme cytochromes with closest similarity to those of the known Fe-reducing/oxidizing archaeon Ferroglobus placidus. Thus, we suggest that ANME2-D may couple methane oxidation to reduction of ferric iron minerals in the sediment and may be generally important as a link between the iron and methane cycles in deep subsurface environments. Such information has important implications for modeling the global carbon cycle.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85392", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85393" } }
{"authors":"Christopher Olson::Scripps Institution of Oceanography--Karen Stocks::Scripps Institution of Oceanography--Aaron Sweeney::Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences--", "title":"IN21D-1716: NavManager: Open Source Software for Processing Shipboard Navigation Data", "abstract":"NavManager is a suite of tools developed as part of the Rolling Deck to Repository Program (R2R; www.rvdata.us) for working with shipboard navigation data. We have packaged and published these tools on GitHub as a resource for the scientific community. The code was originally developed to process navigation data collected aboard vessels across the UNOLS fleet. Due to the breadth of both platforms and devices within UNOLS, navigation data is often of varying quality and stored in custom formats. The goal of R2R was to standardize formatting for end users as well as create a standard quality benchmark by which to compare navigation file sets. Tools were made to parse data, produce data quality metrics, and create a suite of quality controlled data products. These approaches provide a standard base for all other vessel-collected data that rely on accurate navigation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85393", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85394" } }
{"authors":"Steven Schill::University of California San Diego--Douglas Collins::University of California San Diego--Christopher Lee::University of California San Diego--Holly Morris::University of Iowa--Gordon Novak::University of Wisconsin Madison--Kimberly Prather::University of California San Diego--Patricia Quinn::NOAA Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory--Camille Sultana::University of California San Diego--Alexei Tivanski::University of Iowa--Kathryn Zimmermann::University of California San Diego--Christopher Cappa::University of California Davis--Timothy Bertram::University of Wisconsin Madison--", "title":"A43C-0295: Development and Application of a Hygroscopicity Basis Set for the Analysis of the Mixing State of Nascent Sea Spray Aerosols", "abstract":"Primary aerosol particles, such as those produced from breaking waves in the ocean, are known to display large particle-particle variability in chemical composition, which affects their ability to act as cloud condensation nuclei (CCN). Current measurement techniques typically characterize CCN activation efficiency in terms of the single parameter hygroscopicity coefficient, κ, but these techniques do not account for how the chemical heterogeneity of marine aerosol particles translates to corresponding differences in their hygroscopicity. Here, we describe a methodology for assessing the distribution of super saturated hygroscopicities within the same aerosol population, in terms of a “κ basis set” analysis, and apply that methodology to model aerosol mixtures with prescribed mixing states. Moreover, the generalizability of this new analysis allows for application to hygroscopicity data sets that have been previously collected, as well as those outside of the marine environment. Development and application of the κ basis set analysis will be discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85394", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85395" } }
{"authors":"Mahmoud Mostafa Khalil::University of Tokyo--Tomochika Tokunaga::University of Tokyo--Usama Massoud::National Research Institute of Astronomy and Geophysics (NRIAG)--", "title":"H13J-1719: Quantifying the Groundwater Mixing Processes under the Land-Use Change and Anthropogenic Impact: A Case Study of the Quaternary Groundwater System underlying the New Reclaimed Lands, the Eastern Fringe of the Nile Delta, Egypt", "abstract":"The stable (δ2H, δ18O and δ13C) and radiocarbon (14C) isotopic compositions of water and hydrochemical information were analyzed and used to quantify the contribution of different sources, i.e., groundwater in the original Quaternary and the Miocene aquifers, surface water in the Ismailia canal and wastewater, to the Quaternary aquifer system. 14C activities and isotope data suggest that about 52% of groundwater in the Quaternary aquifer is derived from the past rainfall, i.e., presumably 5000-7800 years B.P. Northward (EC <1000 µS/cm, high HCO3- concentration, δ13C-depleted, δ18O/δ2H-enriched, and 14C ≥ 70 pMC) and southward (EC >6000 µS/cm, low HCO3- concentration, δ13C-enriched, δ18O/δ2H-depleted, and 14C ≤ 42 pMC) spatial changes in chemical and isotopic compositions of groundwater in the Quaternary aquifer are attributed to the contributions of the Ismailia canal in the north and the groundwater of the Miocene aquifer in the south, respectively. Temporal changes of isotopic composition of the Nile water in response to the construction of the Aswan High Dam are also detected and the information is used to evaluate the groundwater recharge processes from the Ismailia canal. Current contribution from the Ismailia canal (25%) is considered to be greatly enhanced through surface water diversion and related irrigation practices, i.e., freshwater ponds. Contribution of the groundwater from the Miocene aquifer was also detected locally, and it was thought to be related to the excessive pumping. Increase in nitrate concentrations, change in the stable isotopic composition of groundwater from wells adjacent to wastewater ponds, along with the information obtained from the analysis of city water balance and recent geophysical data show that local recharge from wastewater ponds (4%) occurs to the Quaternary aquifer system. The results are expected to be helpful for formulating appropriate protection and sustainable water management strategies.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85395", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85396" } }
{"authors":"Chia-Wei Kuo::Department of Geoscience, National Taiwan University--Sheng-Rong Song::NTU National Taiwan University--", "title":"H23A-1562: Sensitivity Studies of 3D Geothermal Reservoir Simulation: A Case Study in I-Lan Plain, Taiwan", "abstract":"A large scale geothermal project conducted by Ministry of Science and Technology is initiated recently in I-Lan south area, northeastern Taiwan. The ultimate goal of this national project is to increase the percentage of renewable energy (ex. geothermal energy) to generate electricity. An integrated team which consists of various specialties are held together to investigate I-Lan area comprehensively. For example, I-Lan geological data, petrophysical analysis, seismicity, temperature gradient and distribution, hydrology, geochemistry, and heat source study etc. The geothermal gradient measured at one drilling well (1200m deep) is up to 50˚C/km and the prediction of temperature based on fluid inclusion analysis could be up to 300˚C. The geothermal reservoir is expected to occur at a fractured geological formation, Siling sandstone layer. A 3D subsurface geological model is built mainly based on the seismic exploration of the subsurface structure and well log data. According to the current conceptual model, the target area is bounded by two main faults, Jiaosi and Choshui faults. The preliminary results from all the investigations are integrated and used as input parameters to create a realistic numerical reservoir model. Numerical simulator TOUGH2 is used to study the geothermal energy potential. The initial state of temperature distribution is simulated and compared to the high resolution of magnetotelluric (MT) data. Simulation results show that they have similar pattern and therefore the prediction of geothermal potential in this area would be more reliable. Based on the realistic initial state, sensitivity studies are performed to investigate effects of relevant parameters on temperature distribution.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85396", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85397" } }
{"authors":"Kathleen Casados::Carleton College--Steven Schill::University of California San Diego--Sean Freeman::Florida State University--Matthew Zoerb::California Polytechnic State University San Luis Obispo--Timothy Bertram::University of Wisconsin Madison--Barry Lefer::NASA Headquarters--", "title":"A41A-0013: Direct Measurement of Atmospheric Ammonia from an Airborne Miniature Chemical Ionization Mass Spectrometer (miniCIMS)", "abstract":"Ammonia is emitted into the atmosphere from a variety of sources such as trees, ocean, diary fields, biomass burning, and fuel emissions. Previous studies have investigated the environmental impacts of atmospheric ammonia which can include chemical reactivity, nucleation of fine particulate matter 2.5 (PM 2.5 ), and implications for human health, but its chemical nature and relatively short lifetime make direct measurement of atmospheric ammonia difficult. During the 2015 NASA Student Airborne Research Program (SARP) an airborne miniature Chemical Ionization Mass Spectrometer (miniCIMS) was deployed on the NASA DC-8 flying laboratory in the Southern California region. The spatial and temporal variability of measured atmospheric ammonia concentrations will be discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85397", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85398" } }
{"authors":"Ning Zeng::University of Maryland College Park--", "title":"GC41D-1122: Ecological carbon sequestration via wood harvest and storage (WHS): Can it be a viable climate mitigation and adaptation strategy for the Amazon?", "abstract":"A carbon sequestration strategy is proposed in which forests are sustainably managed to optimal carbon productivity, and a fraction of the wood is selectively harvested and stored to prevent decomposition under anaerobic, dry or cold conditions. Because a large flux of CO2 is constantly assimilated into the world’s forests via photosynthesis, cutting off its return pathway to the atmosphere forms an effective carbon sink. The live trees serve as a ‘carbon scrubber’ or ‘carbon remover’ that provides continuous sequestration (negative emissions). The stored wood is a semi-permanent carbon sink, but also serves as a ‘biomass/bioenergy reserve’ that could be utilized in the future. We discuss the particular relevance of this strategy to the Amazon which is under the double threat of climate change and deforestation. As an alternative to REDD, we propose mixed-use of peripheral Amazon basin while keeping the core of the Amazon intact. We argue that this may be a more practical solution in light of the likely climate change impact and human activities.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85398", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85399" } }
{"authors":"Hermann Fritz::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--Jessica Pilarczyk::Institute of Marine and Coastal Science Earth Observatory of Singapore--Thomas Kosciuch::University of Southern Mississippi--Isabel Hong::Institute of Marine and Coastal Science--Allan Rarai::Vanuatu Meteorology and Geo-Hazards Department--Morris Harrison::Vanuatu Meteorology and Geo-Hazards Department--Fred Jockley::Vanuatu Meteorology and Geo-Hazards Department--Ben Horton::Rutgers University New Brunswick Earth Observatory of Singapore--", "title":"NH24A-01: Tropical cyclone Pam coastal impact survey in Vanuatu", "abstract":"Severe tropical cyclone Pam (Cat. 5, SSHS) crossed the Vanuatu archipelago with sustained winds of 270 km/h on March 13 and 14, 2015 and made landfall on Erromango. Pam caused the worst natural disaster in Vanuatu’s recorded history since severe tropical cyclone Uma in 1987. Eleven fatalities were directly attributed to cyclone Pam and mostly due to lack of shelter from airborne debris. On March 6 Pam formed east of the Santa Cruz Islands and intensified while tracking southward along Vanuatu severely affecting the Shefa and Tafea Provinces. An international storm surge reconnaissance team was deployed to Vanuatu from June 3 to 17, 2015 to complement earlier local surveys. Cyclone Pam struck a remote island archipelago particularly vulnerable to the combined cyclonic multi-hazards encompassing extreme wind gusts, massive rainfall and coastal flooding due to a combination of storm surge and storm wave impacts. The team surveyed coastal villages on Epi, the Shepherd Islands (Tongoa and Mataso), Efate (including Lelepa), Erromango, and Tanna. The survey spanned 320 km parallel to the cyclone track between Epi and Tanna encompassing more than 45 sites including the hardest hit settlements. Coastal flooding profiles were surveyed from the shoreline to the limit of inundation. Maximum coastal flood elevations and overland flow depths were measured based on water marks on buildings, scars on trees, rafted debris and corroborated with eyewitness accounts. We surveyed 91 high water marks with characteristic coastal flood levels in the 3 to 7 m range and composed of storm surge with superimposed storm waves. Inundation distances were mostly limited to a few hundred meters. Coral boulders of more than 1 m diameter were measured on Erromango and sediment samples were collected at key sites across the archipelago. Infrastructure damage on traditional and modern structures was assessed. Eyewitnesses were interviewed at most sites to document the chronology of the wind and coastal flooding events, survival strategies, cyclone and tsunami awareness, evacuation procedures, shelter locations and ancestral knowledge. The measured cyclone Pam high water marks will facilitate the interpretation of the collected sedimentary evidence and serve as benchmarks for modeling studies.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85399", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85400" } }
{"authors":"Heon-Cheol Chi::KIGAM Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources--Jung-ho Park::KIGAM Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources--In Seub Lim::KIGAM Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources--Yun Jeong Seong::KIGAM Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources--", "title":"S33B-2775: The discrimination filters to increase the reliability of EEW association on the location using geometric distribution of triggered stations with upgrading a travel time model.", "abstract":"In operation of Earthquake Early Warning System (EEWS), the alerting criteria are one of the most important parameters in optimizing acceptable warning system. During early stage of testing EEW systems from 2011 to 2013, we adapted ElarmS by UC Berkeley BSL to Korean seismic network and applied very simple criteria for event alerting with the combination of the numbers of station and magnitude. As a result of the testing we found out that the real-time test result of Earthquake Early Warning (EEW) system in Korea showed that all events located within seismic network with bigger than magnitude 3.0 were well detected. However, two events located at sea between land and island gave false results with magnitude over 4.0 related to the teleseismic waves and one event located in land gave false results with magnitude over 3.0 related to the teleseismic waves. These teleseismic-relevant false events were caused by logical co-relation during association procedure and the corresponding geometric distribution of associated stations is crescent-shaped. Seismic stations are not deployed uniformly, so the expected bias ratio varies with evaluated epicentral location. This ratio is calculated in advance and stored into database, called as TrigDB, for the discrimination of teleseismic-origin false alarm. We developed a method, so called ‘TrigDB back filling’, updating location with supplementary association of stations comparing triggered times between sandwiched stations which was not associated previously based on predefined criteria such as travel-time. Because EEW program assume that all events are local, teleseismic-relevant events can give more triggered stations by using back filling of the unassociated stations than the normal association. And we also developed a travel time curve (K-SEIS-1DTT2015) to reduce split event for EEWS. After applying the K-SEIS-1DTT2015 model, these teleseismic-relevant false events are reduced. As a result of these methods we could get more reliable location.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85400", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85401" } }
{"authors":"Christy Gibson::Purdue University--Timothy Filley::Purdue University--Jeff Bird::CUNY Queens College--Knute Nadelhoffer::Univ of Mich- Eco & Evol Bio--Ruth Stark::City University of New York--Pierre-Joseph Hatton::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--", "title":"GC33E-1359: The stability of Pyrogenic Organic Matter is dependent upon its wood source and charring temperature", "abstract":"Fire is a major mediator of carbon (C) cycling in forests and can result in the formation of pyrogenic organic matter (PyOM). The biological reactivity of PyOM is largely dependent upon the physiochemical characteristics of source material and production temperature. As a result, PyOM can persist up to centennial time scales after deposition while simultaneously enhancing or suppressing the mineralization of native soil C (NSC). To investigate the interactive effects of PyOM source and production temperature on NSC, we added 13C-enriched red maple (RM) or jack pine (JP) pyrolyzed at 200, 300, 450 or 600°C to a low C (0.5%;), near-surface soil (0–20 cm-depth) at 60% water holding capacity and 11% of native soil C and then incubated the samples in the dark at 25⁰C for 6 months. We found that PyOM mineralization rates decreased with increasing pyrolysis temperature for either species while NSC mineralization was suppressed across all treatments with the largest decrease observed in JP 300⁰C. RM mineralization rates were consistently greater (∼5 to ∼25%) than for JP <600⁰C during the first 17 days. Mean residence time (MRT) of PyOM-C was significantly higher in PyOM >300°C resulting in MRT of ~300 – 550 y compared to 8–30 y in lower temperature PyOM (0-300 °C). RM exhibited significantly lower MRT in 300°C PyOM than JP corresponding to differences observed in PyOM and NSC mineralization rates. The modelled active and slow pools of PyOM-C mineralized decreased with increasing combustion temperature. JP 300°C had a 20% smaller active pool when compared to RM suggesting that for both species, 300⁰C - 450⁰C represented a thermal transition point which was most evident in jack pine. These results highlight how differences in PyOM physiochemical characteristics linked to a species thermal transformation threshold may be a predictor in determining its biological reactivity in soil.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85401", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85402" } }
{"authors":"Yongli Wang::NASA/GSFC--Timothy Stubbs::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Jan Merka::University of Maryland Baltimore County--David Sibeck::NASA/GSFC--Vassilis Angelopoulos::University of California Los Angeles--", "title":"SM13C-2505: Plasma Characteristics and Transport in the Near-Lunar Magnetotail: Observations from THEMIS/ARTEMIS", "abstract":"The region of the Earth’s magnetosphere tailward of ~30 RE remains relatively unexplored. A better characterization of the processes taking place in the mid-to-distant magnetotail is critical to a more complete understanding of the coupling between the solar wind and the Earth’s magnetosphere. Similarly, an assessment of the magnetotail plasma encountered by the Moon will be valuable for understanding how the lunar environment is modified during these traversals. The THEMIS/ARTEMIS missions have returned sufficient data from this region of the magnetotail for a large-scale statistical survey to be undertaken with the publicly available data from NASA/CDAWeb. In this study various plasma moments are organized by occurrence frequency and location in the magnetotail. Further sorting is done to identify different regions within the magnetotail, such as the tail lobes and plasma sheet, and the physical processes taking place, such as reconnection. Additional sorting of the ion data has been required in order to identify intervals in the tail lobe where the signal-to-noise is so low that moments are erroneously calculated from just background counts. Initial results indicate that previous studies of the mid-to-distant magnetotail that were limited to using electron moments from the ISEE-3 mission overestimated Alfven Mach numbers. Super-Alfvenic flows, such as those associated with reconnection, are very rare in this region of the magnetotail. This survey is the first step in constructing a comprehensive large-scale picture of the energization, distribution, and transport of plasma in the mid-to-distant magnetotail, as well as characterizing the properties of the plasma environments encountered by the Moon during magnetotail traversals.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85402", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85403" } }
{"authors":"Choi Soo::NIER National Institute of Environmental Research--", "title":"A11G-0153: The characteristics of PM1.0 for aircraft measurement case study using ToF-AMS for pre-campaign KORUS-AQ", "abstract":"Jinsoo Choi, Jinsoo Park, Joonyoung Ahn, Sangdeok Lee, Hyunjae Kim, Jun Oh, Youdeog Hong, Jihyung Hong, TaeHyeng Lee1 Air Quality Division, National Institute of Environmental Research, Korea 1Department of Environmental Science, Hankuk University of Foreign Studies, Korea For the Pre-KORUS-AQ Campaign during the period from May 18 to June 13 2015, aircraft observations were conducted: four times over the Yellow Sea and three times above Seoul Metropolitan Area (SMA). Aerosol (PM1.0) chemical composition and particles size distribution from 50 to 1000 nm were measured and analyzed using ToF-AMS installed the airplane (Kingair-C90GT, USA) in semi-real time. Concentrations of CO and the number of particles were measured as well. To analyze the aerosol’s spatial and vertical characteristics, 5 flight paths were designed and the main paths were a cross over above SMA and spatial and vertical profile paths over the Yellow Sea. The flight distance varied from 600 to 900km and the velocity was kept at around 200 to 250 km/hr. On June 13 2015, the sky in SMA was densely fogged and the PM concentrations were relatively higher than usual. As for concentrations of main fine particles, Sulfate was 6.1 mg/m3, Organic 20.7 mg/m3, Ammonium 2.9 mg/m3 and Nitrate 2.9 mg/m3. Group of organic components consisted of 38.3% CxHy, 30.4% CxHyO1, 27.4% CxHyO2, 2.9% CxHyNp and 1.0% CxHyOzNp, and the proportion of oxidation group was 57.9%. As for CxHyO1 and CxHyO2 groups that are generated from decomposition process of oxidized organic compounds and closely related to SOA, the concentrations were 1.5 times higher than CxHy group’s that is related with POA; it is considered that the high concentration on the 13th was highly affected by SOA. In the morning of the same day, aircraft measurements were conducted at the altitude between 600 and 2,700m above the Yellow Sea level, which revealed measurements of Sulfate 4.8 mg/m3, Organic 35.8 mg/m3, Ammonium 3.0 mg/m3 and Nitrate 3.7 mg/m3; these are similar to or higher than the SMA levels. Ionic group of organic components was composed of 43.4% CxHy, 30.1% CxHyO1, 23.8% CxHyO2, 1.9% CxHyNp and 0.8% CxHyOzNp, and the proportion of oxidized group was about 1.2 times higher than CxHy group; which was similar to the composition of the organic components in SMA.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85403", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85404" } }
{"authors":"Alexandra Salinas::University of Arizona--Dragos Zaharescu::University of Arizona--", "title":"H43G-1604: Root development during soil genesis: effects of root-root interactions, mycorrhizae, and substrate", "abstract":"A major driver of soil formation is the colonization and transformation of rock by plants and associated microbiota. In turn, substrate chemical composition can also influence the capacity for plant colonization and development. In order to better define these relationships, a mesocosm study was set up to analyze the effect mycorrhizal fungi, plant density and rock have on root development, and to determine the effect of root morphology on weathering and soil formation. We hypothesized that plant-plant and plant-fungi interactions have a stronger influence on root architecture and rock weathering than the substrate composition alone. Buffalo grass (Bouteloua dactyloides) was grown in a controlled environment in columns filled with either granular granite, schist, rhyolite or basalt. Each substrate was given two different treatments, including grass-microbes and grass-microbes-mycorrhizae and incubated for 120, 240, and 480 days. Columns were then extracted and analyzed for root morphology, fine fraction, and pore water major element content. Preliminary results showed that plants produced more biomass in rhyolite, followed by schist, basalt, and granite, indicating that substrate composition is an important driver of root development. In support of our hypothesis, mycorrhizae was a strong driver of root development by stimulating length growth, biomass production, and branching. However, average root length and branching also appeared to decrease in response to high plant density, though this trend was only present among roots with mycorrhizal fungi. Interestingly, fine fraction production was negatively correlated with average root thickness and volume. There is also slight evidence indicating that fine fraction production is more related to substrate composition than root morphology, though this data needs to be further analyzed. Our hope is that the results of this study can one day be applied to agricultural research in order to promote the production of crops on traditionally un-arable land.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85404", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85405" } }
{"authors":"Shin-Chan Han::University of Newcastle--Jeanne Sauber::NASA Goddard SFC--Frederick Pollitz::USGS California Water Science Center Menlo Park--", "title":"G31A-1106: Postseismic gravity changes caused by persistent viscoelastic relaxation after a series of great earthquakes since 2004", "abstract":"GRACE data has detected regional-scale coseismic and postseismic gravity changes after recent great earthquakes, including 2004 Mw9.2 Sumatra-Andaman, 2005 Mw8.5 Nias, 2007 Mw8.5 Bengkulu, 2010 Mw8.8 Maule, 2011 Mw9.0 Tohoku-Oki, 2012 Mw8.6 Wharton Basin (Indian Ocean), and 2013 Mw8.3 Okhotsk earthquakes. Those earthquakes caused abrupt gravity field changes and triggered gradual postseismic adjustment that are expected to continue for years to decades due to viscoelastic relaxation. Significant postseismic gravity changes were recorded in GRACE not only for megathrust ruptures (as large as Mw9.2), but also for non-megathrust earthquakes (as small as Mw8.1) with very different mechanisms and properties, such as strike-slip earthquakes (not causing large vertical motion, e.g., 2012 Wharton Basin earthquake) and normal faulting events (e.g., 2007 Kuril earthquake). The cumulative postseismic gravity change can be even larger than the coseismic change depending on the rupture mechanism and the Earth’s rheological structure around the region. The results from the newest GRACE Release-05 (RL05) Level-2 (L2) solutions found that the combined coseismic gravimetric signal from Mw8.3 Kuril thrust and Mw8.1 normal faulting events (doublet) was small but it produced substantial postseismic gravity change. Our preliminary results are consistent with the prominent influence of a biviscous asthenosphere underlying a thin elastic lithosphere in the Kuril trench. Now we have a unique opportunity to examine various types of earthquakes at time-scales from months to decades comprehensively using nearly 14 years of continuous gravity measurements from GRACE and to be extended for another decade or longer by GRACE-FO. In this presentation, we review the GRACE observations of postseismic gravity changes from those earthquakes and provide the numerical modelling results of gravity change anticipated from viscoelastic relaxation. By optimizing the model parameters, we will show the regional variability in the rheological structures along the plate boundaries. Our study will be indispensable not only for advancing earthquake physics but also for enabling climate investigations relying on GRACE data free of tectonic signals. We will discuss our progress to provide the optimized physical models of co- and post-seismic gravity changes to the GRACE Project and the broader science community for “earthquake corrections” to L1B and L2 data (just like “Atmosphere and Ocean De-aliasing”, AOD products) to improve quantification of secular trends of ocean, cryosphere, and hydrological mass transport from GRACE measurements.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85405", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85406" } }
{"authors":"Tushar Sinha::Texas A & M University Kingsville--Didier Gonzalez::Texas A & M University Kingsville--Jae-Hyung Ji::Texas A & M University Kingsville--", "title":"H13J-1723: Freshwater Sustainability under Climate Change in the Nueces River Basin, TX", "abstract":"Freshwater sustainability in arid and semi-arid regions is threatened due to climate change as well as competing water demands for agriculture, urban development, industrial use and ecosystem needs. Such changes have forced the local water supply systems to update their water supply plans once in five years. Developments of such water supply plans not only require reliable assessment of water availability and demands but also incorporate uncertainties due to regional climate change projections. In this study, we focus our analysis on one of the basins in the South Texas – Nueces River Basin (NRB) which provide inflows to the Choke Canyon - Lake Corpus Christi reservoir system. This reservoir system is the major freshwater source for the coastal communities in the basin and the Nueces Bay, which serve as a habitat for several key fish species such as blue crab, brown shrimp, and southern flounder. Freshwater inflows in the NRB have decreased in the past decades, resulting in increased salinity of the Nueces Bay, thus impacting the natural habitat for several fish species. Therefore, estimating the impacts of climate change in the NRB is critical to develop sustainable water resources management in the region. We will implement a physically based hydrologic model under historical climate change scenarios from multiple General Circulation Models (GCMs) over the past 30 years to understand how well we could have used large scale climate change projections in improving water resources management over the overlapping observations. A water management model will be developed for the Choke Canyon – Lake Corpus Christi Reservoir System, which will be ingested with inflow projections under multiple GCM scenarios over the past 30 years to incorporate uncertainty in water resources management. Finally, water management scenarios will be developed to minimize deficits between water availability and demands in the region.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85406", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85407" } }
{"authors":"Andrea Ustra::USP University of Sao Paulo--Lee Slater::Rutgers Univ--Dimitrios Ntarlagiannis::Rutgers University Newark--Chi Zhang::University of Kansas--Carlos Mendonça::IAG Institute of Astronomy, Geophysics and Atmospheric Sciences--", "title":"H11A-1315: Relaxation Time Distribution (RTD) of Spectral Induced Polarization (SIP) data from environmental studies", "abstract":"In this work we present an alternative formulation of the Debye Decomposition (DD) of complex conductivity spectra, with a new set of parameters that are directly related to the continuous Debye relaxation model. The procedure determines the relaxation time distribution (RTD) and two frequency-independent parameters that modulate the induced polarization spectra. The distribution of relaxation times quantifies the contribution of each distinct relaxation process, which can in turn be associated with specific polarization processes and characterized in terms of electrochemical and interfacial parameters as derived from mechanistic models. Synthetic tests show that the procedure can successfully fit spectral induced polarization (SIP) data and accurately recover the RTD. The procedure was applied to different data sets, focusing on environmental applications. We focus on data of sand-clay mixtures artificially contaminated with toluene, and crude oil-contaminated sands experiencing biodegradation. The results identify characteristic relaxation times that can be associated with distinct polarization processes resulting from either the contaminant itself or transformations associated with biodegradation. The inversion results provide information regarding the relative strength and dominant relaxation time of these polarization processes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85407", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85408" } }
{"authors":"Makoto Yoshikawa::Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency--Seiichiro Watanabe::Nagoya University--Yukio Yamamoto::--", "title":"P11B-2102: The Science of Asteroid Sample Return Mission Hayabusa2", "abstract":"Hayabusa2, which is the follow-on mission of Hayabusa, was launched on Dec. 3, 2014. The target asteroid is (162173) 1999 JU3, a C-type, small Near Earth Asteroid. The principal purpose of Hayabusa2 is to study the origin and evolution of the solar system, especially the origin of organic matters and waters on the earth. Hayabusa2 will arrive at 1999 JU3 in June or July 2018, stay there for about one and half years, leave there at the end of 2019, and come back to the earth at the end of 2020. The main mission is the sample return, taking the surface materials of 1999 JU3 and bringing them back to the earth. We will try to get the samples not only from the surface but also from the subsurface by creating a small crater on the surface of the asteroid (see the figure). Hayabusa2 has remote sensing instruments as follows: Optical Navigation Cameras (ONC-T/W1/W2), Near Infrared Spectrometer (NIRS3), Thermal Infrared Imager (TIR), and Laser Altimeter (LIDAR). It has also three small rovers (MINERVA-II-1A/1B/2), and one small lander (MASCOT), which was provided by DLR and CNES. Small Carry-on Impactor (SCI) is used to create a small crater and the impact event is observed by a deployable camera (DCAM3). Thus we can use a wide variety of data to study this C-type asteroid. And of course, we will analyze the samples in detail after the capsule of Hayabusa2 comes back to the earth. For the science researches, we have Hayabusa2 science team in Japan. As for the international science discussions we organized Hayabusa2 Joint Science Team (HJST). HJST is presently consists of Japanese science members and European members who are mostly related MASCOT. We had four general meetings up to now. In this year (2015), NASA announced Hayabusa2 Participating Scientist Program. If US scientists are selected, they will be the members of HJST. In addition to this, we have started discussions with OSIRIS-REx team for the science collaboration. We hope that Hayabusa2 will produce much more scientific results by the international collaborations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85408", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85410" } }
{"authors":"Eileen Martin::Stanford University--Nate Lindsey::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Biondo Biondi::Stanford University--Jason Chang::Stanford University--Jonathan Ajo Franklin::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Shan Dou::University of California Berkeley Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Thomas Daley::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Barry Freifeld::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Michelle Robertson::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Craig Ulrich::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Anna Wagner::Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory Alaska--Kevin Bjella::U.S. Army Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory Alaska--", "title":"S41B-2745: Fast Algorithm for Continuous Monitoring with Ambient Noise", "abstract":"A common approach to analyzing ambient seismic noise involves O(n^2) pairwise cross-correlations of n sensors. Following cross-correlations the resulting coherent waveforms are then synthesized into a velocity estimate, often in the form of a dispersion image. As we move towards larger surveys and arrays for continuous subsurface monitoring, this computation can become prohibitively expensive. We show that theoretically equivalent results can be achieved by a simple algorithm which skips the cross-correlations, and scales as O(n). Additionally, this algorithm is embarrassingly parallel, and is significantly cheaper than the commonly used algorithms. We demonstrate the algorithm on two field data sets: (1) a continuously recording linear trenched distributed acoustic sensing (DAS) array designed as a pilot test to develop a permafrost thaw monitoring system, and (2) the Long Beach Array, an irregularly spaced 3D array. These results show superior performance in both speed and numerical accuracy. An open-source implementation of this algorithm is available.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85410", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85411" } }
{"authors":"Lianjie Huang::Los Alamos National Laboratory--Youzuo Lin::Los Alamos National Laboratory--Ting Chen::Los Alamos National Laboratory--", "title":"S21A-2672: Improving Velocity Models for Microseismic Imaging", "abstract":"Microseismic imaging is a useful tool for monitoring migration of the CO2 plume and subsurface pressure changes during geologic carbon storage. An accurate velocity model is crucial for microseismic event location and focal mechanism inversion. For cost-effective long-term monitoring, the number of seismic stations are often limited, and their spatial distribution is usually sparse. To obtain an accurate velocity model for microseismic imaging, we develop a double-difference tomography method with a compressive sensing technique. The compressive sensing technique was developed to extract information from sparsely measured signals. We adapt this technique into double-difference tomography to alleviate inversion artifacts caused by the sparse distribution of seismic stations. We validate our new method using synthetic microseismic data and show that our new method significantly improves the accuracy of microseismic velocity inversion for a sparse seismic network.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85411", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85413" } }
{"authors":"Anak Agung Sagung Putri Komaladara::Udayana University--I Wayan Budiasa::Udayana University--I Gusti Ambarawati::Udayana University--", "title":"GC51D-1123: Rice Production Vulnerability to Climate Change in Indonesia: An Overview on Community-based Adaptation", "abstract":"Rice remains to be a major crop and staple food in Indonesia. The task to ensure that rice production meets the demand of a growing population continues to engage the attention of national planners and policy makers. However, the adverse effects of climate change on agriculture production have presented Indonesia with yet another significant challenge. The exposure of rice crops to climate-related hazards such as temperature stress, floods, and drought, may lead to lower yield and self-sufficiency rate. This study explores the vulnerability of rice production to the effects of climate change in Indonesia. Considering the vast geographical span of the country and varying exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity to climate change at regional level, this study emphasize the importance of community-based adaptation. Results from a simulation based on production and climate data from 1984 to 2014 indicates that rice production is sensitive to variation in growing season temperature and precipitation. A projection of these climate factors in 2050 has a significant impact on the major rice crop. To manage the impact of climate change, this study turns to the potential roles of farmer organizations, such as Subak, in adaptation strategies. The Subak in Bali is recognized for its cultural and organizational framework that highlights the sharing of knowledge and local wisdom in rice production. This is demonstrated by its efficient community-based irrigation management system, leading to sustainable rice production. Keywords: rice production, climate change, community-based adaptation, Indonesia", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85413", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85415" } }
{"authors":"Timothy Walsh::WA State Dept of Natural Resources--Randall LeVeque::University of Washington--Loyce Adams::University of Washington Seattle Campus--John Schelling::Washington Military Department--Frank Gonzalez::University of Washington Seattle Campus--Recep Cakir::Washington State Department of Natural Resources--", "title":"NH23C-1896: New Cascadia subduction zone tsunami inundation modeling to guide relocation of coastal infrastucture for Indian tribes on the northern Washington coast", "abstract":"There have been advances in understanding the potential for great tsunamigenic earthquakes on the Cascadia Subduction Zone, motivating an effort to update the assessment of tsunami hazards on the Washington coast. Fine resolution (1/3 arc-second) digital elevation models (DEMs) of the Strait of Juan de Fuca and northern Olympic Peninsula have recently been made available, and coastal Indian tribes (Quinault, Hoh, and Quileute) have made plans to move important infrastructure out of their tsunami hazard zones. We have made numerical simulations of tsunamis incident on the Quinault, Hoh, Quileute, and Makah Reservations and adjacent coast with the GeoClaw numerical model [ http://depts.washington.edu/clawpack/geoclaw/ ] for a local tsunami generated by a 9.1M Cascadia Subduction Zone earthquake, designated L1 by Witter and others (DOGAMI Special Paper 43). This scenario is estimated to have `2% probability of nonexceedance in 50 years, which would be comparable to the International Building Code standard for seismic loading on structures of high importance, and provides appropriate guidance to the affected communities for siting of their significant infrastructure.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85415", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85416" } }
{"authors":"Matthew Weingarten::University of Colorado--Shemin Ge::University of Colorado--", "title":"S13B-2820: Hydrogeologic Modeling Aimed at Optimizing Injection Well Operation in a Hypothetical Multi-Injection Well Reservoir: Implications for Induced Seismicity", "abstract":"Recent studies in the field of induced seismicity have shown high injection rates as the predominant driver of the recent increase in U.S. mid-continent seismicity. In regions with critically stressed, optimally oriented preexisting faults, well operation and the ability of a pore pressure perturbation to reach one of these faults governs the likelihood of an induced seismic event. Past case studies of hypothetical injections have simulated the pressure perturbation of single well injection systems, without considering the effect of pressure perturbation superposition in a multi-well injection system. In some regions where seismicity is suspected to be induced, the spatial density of injection wells can be greater than 5 wells per 5 km2, suggesting the effects of well superposition may be significant. In addition, induced earthquakes often occur on previously unrecognized faults, which leads us to aim towards minimizing the region of reservoir pressure perturbation above a designated critical pressure threshold. We test several well operational and hydrogeologic parameters that control the magnitude, timing and extent of pressure perturbation superposition in a hypothetical multi-injection well system. The parameters tested in the model are injection well spacing, injection rate as well as the permeability and storage coefficients of the injection reservoir. The magnitude, timing and extent of pressure perturbation superposition is highly dependent upon all tested parameters. Furthermore, optimal injection well spacing and optimal injection rates vary greatly based on hydrogeologic parameters. We compare the results of our hypothetical simulations to observed injection well spacing, injection rates and seismicity rates per unit area in regions prone to induced seismicity.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85416", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85417" } }
{"authors":"Michael Buckley::Applied Physics Laboratory Johns Hopkins--", "title":"ED43A-0869: Earth, Meet Pluto: The New Horizons Education and Communications Partnership", "abstract":"The unique partnership between the NASA New Horizons education/communications and public affairs programs tapped into the excitement of visiting an unexplored planet in a new region of the solar system – resulting in unprecedented public participation in and coverage of a planetary mission. With a range of hands-on learning experiences, Web materials and online , the program provided opportunities for students, educators, museums, science centers, the media, Web surfers and other members of the public to ride along on the first mission to Pluto and the Kuiper Belt. The programs leveraged resources, materials and expertise to address a wide range of traditional and nontraditional audiences while providing consistent messages and information on this historic NASA endeavor. The E/C program included a variety of formal lesson plans and learning materials — based on New Horizons science and engineering goals, and aligned with National Research Council’s National Science Education Standards — that continue to help students in grades K-12 learn more about science, technology, engineering and mathematics. College students designed and built an actual flight instrument on New Horizons and held internships with the spacecraft integration and test team. New Horizons E/C programs went well beyond the classroom, from a chance for people to send their names to Pluto on board the New Horizons spacecraft before launch, to opportunities for the public to access milestone events and the first-ever close-up views of Pluto in places such as museums, science centers and libraries, TV and the Web — as well as thousands who attended interactive “Plutopalooza” road shows across the country. Teamed with E/C was the public affairs strategy to communicate New Horizons news and messages to media, mission stakeholders, the scientific community and the public. These messages include various aspects of New Horizons, including the progress of the mission and key milestones and achievements; the unique, long-distance operation of the spacecraft and its instruments; and the release of scientific data and results from New Horizons’ historic Pluto encounter. Through traditional and social media channels the mission reached billions of people worldwide – and likely inspired millions among the next generation of STEM professionals.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85417", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85418" } }
{"authors":"Miho Sekiguchi::Tokyo University of Marine Science and Technology--Kentaroh Suzuki::Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute University of Tokyo--Toshihiko Takemura::Kyushu University--Masahiro Watanabe::University of Tokyo--Tomoo Ogura::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--", "title":"A53B-0383: Improvements of the Radiation Code “MstrnX” in AORI/NIES/JAMSTEC Models", "abstract":"There is a large demand for an accurate yet rapid radiation transfer scheme accurate for general climate models. The broadband radiative transfer code “mstrnX”, ,which was developed by Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute (AORI) and was implemented in several global and regional climate models cooperatively developed in the Japanese research community, for example, MIROC (the Model for Interdisciplinary Research on Climate) [Watanabe et al., 2010], NICAM (Non-hydrostatic Icosahedral Atmospheric Model) [Satoh et al, 2008], and CReSS (Cloud Resolving Storm Simulator) [Tsuboki and Sakakibara, 2002]. In this study, we improve the gas absorption process and the scattering process of ice particles. For update of gas absorption process, the absorption line database is replaced by the latest versions of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center, HITRAN2012. An optimization method is adopted in mstrnX to decrease the number of integration points for the wavenumber integration using the correlated k-distribution method and to increase the computational efficiency in each band. The integration points and weights of the correlated k-distribution are optimized for accurate calculation of the heating rate up to altitude of 70 km. For this purpose we adopted a new non-linear optimization method of the correlated k-distribution and studied an optimal initial condition and the cost function for the non-linear optimization. It is known that mstrnX has a considerable bias in case of quadrapled carbon dioxide concentrations [Pincus et al., 2015], however, the bias is decreased by this improvement. For update of scattering process of ice particles, we adopt a solid column as an ice crystal habit [Yang et al., 2013]. The single scattering properties are calculated and tabulated in advance. The size parameter of this table is ranged from 0.1 to 1000 in mstrnX, we expand the maximum to 50000 in order to correspond to large particles, like fog and rain drop. Those update will be introduced to MIROC and adopted for CMIP6 experiment.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85418", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85420" } }
{"authors":"Jennifer Franck::Brown University--Kenneth Breuer::Brown University--Alice Fawzi::Brown University--Jennifer Cardona::Brown University--Michael Miller::Brown University--Yunxing Su::Brown University--Aryssa Medina::Brown University--Cesar Loera Loera::Brown University--Eva Junquera::Brown University--Filip Simeski::Brown University--Kenneth Volkmann::Brown University--Rebecca Lorick::Brown University--Sarah Cowles::Brown University--Bernardo Luiz Rocha Ribeiro::Universidade Federal Fluminense--Steve Winckler::BlueSource Energy Inc--Tom Derecktor::BlueSource Energy Inc--Shreyas Mandre::Brown University--", "title":"GC53C-1216: Oscillating Hydrofoils for Tidal Energy Extraction: Experiments, Simulations and Salt Water Field Tests", "abstract":"We report on the development of a new oscillating hydrofoil technology for tidal flow energy harvesting. A series of flume experiments and computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations have been performed over a wide range of frequencies, f, heave amplitudes, h, and pitch angles, θ. The flume model has chord, c, of 10 cm and aspect ratio of 4.5. Mechanical power extracted is estimated from the foil trajectory, force and moment data. A robust real-time algorithm has been developed to identify the kinematics that optimizes either the total power or the Betz efficiency. Optimal efficiency is found when the pitch and heave cycles are 90 degrees out of phase, oscillating at a reduced frequency, fc/U, of approximately 0.15, with a heave amplitude of approximately 1c, and a pitch amplitude of θ=75 degrees. The high pitch amplitude and sharp leading edge of the foil generates a transient leading edge vortex on the suction side of the foil, significantly enhancing the vertical force and power. The optimal frequency ensures that the vortex generation and ultimate shedding maximize these unsteady hydrodynamic effects. The flume results, including power and efficiency, as well as flow visualization and particle image velocimetry (PIV) exhibit excellent agreement with the CFD. Furthermore, extensive CFD and physical experiments have been performed to investigate the effects of operating in confined or shallow channels. It is found that the efficiency and power generation can significantly increase in confined areas due to the acceleration of the freestream flow around the device. Finally, the Leading Edge team has designed, built, and as of this date, is currently field-testing a 1kW prototype device consisting of two foils operating in parallel. The prototype is attached to the underside of a pontoon boat, and testing is currently underway in the Narragansett Bay near Providence RI. On completion of the field tests, in October 2015, data from the prototype will be analyzed and compared with those from the flume experiments and CFD.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85420", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85421" } }
{"authors":"Bryan Tolson::University of Waterloo--Etienne Gaborit::Environment Canada Dorval--Andrew Gronewold::NOAA Ann Arbor--Vincent Fortin::Environment Canada Dorval--Lauren Fry::Organization Not Listed--Timothy Hunter::NOAA Ann Arbor--", "title":"H23E-1628: The Great Lakes Runoff Intercomparison Project (GRIP): Phase II, Lake Ontario ", "abstract":"The Great Lakes runoff intercomparison project (GRIP) was established to assess a suite of models used primarily for simulating and forecasting flows from all of the major tributaries within the Great Lakes basin. These models are somewhat unique, in part because they were developed to overcome challenges of assimilating data across an international border, and in part because they are often an integral component of regional water budget models that also include simulations of over-lake precipitation and over-lake evaporation (both of which are, on annual time scales, of the same magnitude as runoff). Here, we present the next step in the evolution of GRIP (following GRIP-M, the first phase of the project that focused on Lake Michigan) with a comparison between different hydrological models (including GR4J and the NOAA large basin runoff model) and different regional precipitation data sources across the Lake Ontario basin. Results of our analysis provide insights that underscore the importance of the spatial and temporal resolution of a model domain and its forcings, along with their connections to model skill and selected objective criteria. Perhaps more importantly, our results are expected to assist in the advancement of regional hydrological models not only for improved forecasts of the Great Lakes water cycle, but in other large international freshwater basins as well.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85421", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85422" } }
{"authors":"Romulo Oliveira::National Institute for Space Research (INPE)--Daniel Vila::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Viviana Maggioni::George Mason University Fairfax--Carlos Morales::Universidade de São Paulo--", "title":"H13H-1665: Characteristics and Error Modeling of GPM Satellite Rainfall Estimates over Different Regions of Brazil", "abstract":"This study aims to investigate, over the different regions of Brazil, the error characteristics and uncertainties (random and systematic errors components) in satellite-based precipitation estimates by comparing the Goddard Profiling Algorithm (GPROF), through different sensors from GPM database (such as GMI, TMI, SSMI/S, AMSR2, MHS, among others), and Integrated Multi-satellitE Retrievals for GPM (IMERG) algorithms. The analyses are made with other ground (S- and X-band dual polarization weather radar) and space (e.g., TRMM-PR and GPM-DPR [at Ku-band] active radars) based rainfall estimates as references at instantaneous timescales and respecting their temporal limitations. The Precipitation Uncertainties for Satellite Hydrology (PUSH) framework is used for the analysis and uncertainties characterization and error modeling. Specially, this study are focused on specific regions of Brazil, where the campaigns of the CHUVA project occurred (CHUVA/GoAmazon [IOP1 and 2] in Amazon and over southern Brazil where the S-band dual polarization radars (e.g., the FCTH radar) are located.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85422", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85423" } }
{"authors":"John Dykema::Harvard University--James Anderson::Harvard University--", "title":"A51O-0286: The radiative impact of high stratospheric water vapor levels: implications for remote sensing data and in situ data interpretation", "abstract":"The origin of observed high water vapor levels (exceeding 8 ppmv) over North America during summe in the observational record of the MLS satellite is in dispute. One hypothesis, based on an analysis of a Lagrangian chemical transport model validated with MLS data, is that the water vapor is the result of isentropic transport from lower latitudes that is associated with the Asian monsoon. Under this hypothesis, the observations are well-explained exclusive of any significant contribution from local mid-latitude deep convection. Conversely, measurements of isotopic analogs (isotopologues) of water vapor suggest different hypotheses about cross-tropopause water vapor transport that do not find the Asian monsoon as the dominant source for high LS water vapor over North America. Satellite measurements from the Atmospheric Chemistry Experiment-Fourier Transform Spectrometer (FTS) sensor show elevated levels in the LS of the water vapor isotopologue HDO in the region of the North American monsoon relative to the region of the Asian monsoon, a finding in conflict with an Asian monsoonal source for the North American measurements. It has been argued that HDO is a very effective tracer for deep convection. Analysis of aircraft measurements of HDO had led to a competing hypothesis, that local mid-latitude deep convection is a significant source of elevated LS water vapor observed over North America. This paper will examine the potential for using a case study approach within a trajectory modeling framework to clarify potential mechanistic and physical explanations for the disagreements in identification of the source of the observed high water vapor values. The potential contribution of diabatic heating at small scale to relevant trajectories will receive particular attention. Quantitative interpretation of the modeled test cases will be undertaken, based on a comparison of the final trajectory positions with the expected errors due to known limitations in trajectory models.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85423", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85424" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"EP23A-0945: Coastal Mapping for Baseline Geoscience Knowledge to Support Community Hazard Assessment and Sustainable Development, Eastern Baffin Island, Nunavut", "abstract":"Since 2012 we have carried out extensive multibeam bathymetric and backscatter surveys in coastal waters of eastern Baffin Island, supplemented by sub-bottom imaging and coring. Shore-zone surveys have been undertaken in proximity to the communities of Iqaluit and Qikiqtarjuaq, following earlier work in Clyde River. These support benthic habitat mapping, geological exploration, analysis of past and present sea-level trends, and assessment of coastal hazards relating to climate change and seabed instability. Outputs include a seamless topographic-bathymetric digital elevation model (DEM) of extensive boulder-strewn tidal flats in the large tidal-range setting at Iqaluit, supporting analysis of coastal flooding, wave run-up, and sea-ice impacts on a rapidly developing urban waterfront in the context of climate change. Seabed mapping of inner Frobisher Bay seaward of Iqaluit reveals a potential local tsunami hazard in widespread submarine slope failures, the triggers, magnitudes, and ages of which are the subject of ongoing research. In fjords of the Cumberland Peninsula, this project has mapped numerous submerged delta terraces at 19 to 45 m present water depth. These attest to an early postglacial submerged shoreline, displaced by glacial-isostatic adjustment. It rises linearly over a distance of 100 km east to west, where a submerged boulder barricade on a -16 m shoreline was discovered at a proposed port site in Broughton Channel near Qikiqtarjuaq. Palaeotopographic mapping using the multibeam data revealed an enclosed estuarine environment quite different from the present-day open passage swept by tidal currents. At Clyde River, combined seabed and onshore DEMs with geohazard mapping provided foundation data for community assessment and planning under a local knowledge co-production initiative. The geohazard work identified portions of the town-site more vulnerable to both coastal flooding and potential thaw subsidence, while the shallow delta terrace suggested a reversal from falling to rising relative sea levels. Overall, the coastal mapping results constitute baseline geoscience knowledge infrastructure for navigation, fisheries, port engineering, municipal planning, and informing sustainability initiatives in the isolated coastal communities of this Arctic region.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85424", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85425" } }
{"authors":"Gilles Brocard::University of Pennsylvania--Jane Willenbring::University of Pennsylvania--Emma Harrison::University of Pennsylvania--Frederick Scatena::University of Pennsylvania--", "title":"EP33D-07: How Saharan Dust Slows River Knickpoints: Coupling Vegetation Canopy, Soils and the Foundation of the Critical Zone", "abstract":"Forest succession theory maintains that trees drape existing landscapes as passive niche optimizers, but in the Luquillo Mountains in Puerto Rico, the forest exerts a powerful control on erosion. The Luquillo Critical Zone observatory is set in the Luquillo Mountains, an isolated massif at the northeastern tip of Puerto Rico Island which receives up to five meters of rainfall annually. Most of the rainfall received in the mountains is conveyed as quick flow through soil macropores, inhibiting soil erosion by overland flow. Physical erosion is kept low, occurring in the form of infrequent shallow landslides, thus increasing the residence time of minerals in the near-surface environment. The extensive chemical alteration of minerals generates a thick saprolite covered by fine-grained soil. Over the quartz diorite bedrock that characterizes the southern side of the mountains, the weathering process generates saprolite tens of meters deep that is almost completely devoid of weatherable minerals. Soils forming over this saprolite are nutrient-poor, forcing the rainforest to retrieve its nutrients from atmospheric fluxes, such as Saharan dust and marine aerosols. These atmospheric inputs are thus indirectly essential for the forest to be able to maintain slow erosion rates over the mountains. At lower elevation, using cosmogenic nuclide-derived denudation rates, we identified a wave of incision which has been propagating upstream over the past 4 My in the form of very steep and slowly migrating knickpoints. Bedrock abrasion and plucking are infrequent along the knickpoint faces, because the bedrock is massive and because rivers are bedload-starved. This situation is due to the highly weathered upland soils and slow erosion rates and high weathering rate upstream, which acts to reduce bedload grain size and limits bedload fluxes to the knickpoint, respectively. The soils change radically where the wave of erosion has passed and has increased erosion rates. There, nutrient-rich minerals make their way up into the soils, providing available cations to the forest. This is in turn has a measurable effect on forest biomass and on forest species composition.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85425", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85426" } }
{"authors":"Woo Kyoung Lee::Korea Astronomy and Space Science Institute--Hyosub Kil::Johns Hopkins University--Young-Sil Kwak::KASI Korea Astronomy and Space Science Institute--", "title":"SA23B-2336: Distributions of irregularities, patches, and scintillation in the high-latitude F region seen by Swarm satellites", "abstract":"High-latitude F region is a place where intense radio scintillation is produced by various types of electron density irregularities. The irregularities are known to be associated with plasma patches (enhancements of plasma density with respect to the background density), but the irregularities of other types also frequently occur. The distribution of different types of irregularities has not yet been clearly understood. In this study, we classify the irregularity types based on the morphology and investigate their distribution by analyzing the measurements of the electron density in 2014–2015 by the Langmuir probe onboard the Swarm satellites. We also process the GPS scintillation data provided by the Swarm mission to investigate the dependence of the scintillation occurrence and intensity on the irregularity type.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85426", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85427" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"SH43B-2448: Multiwavelength Analysis of a Moving Type-IV Radio Burst on 4th March 2012", "abstract":"We performed a multiwavelength analysis of a moving Type-IV radio burst on 4th march 2012. The Type-IV radio burst is observed between 10:39 – 11:00 UT in the frequency range of 300 – 20 MHz. From the radio heliographic observation, the radio source of the type-IV burst is traced and their sky plane speed is estimated as ~ 370 km/s. A plasmoid structure is ejected during the impulsive phase of the flare, at the same time of the type-IV burst and the structure is clearly observed at SDO/AIA 131 Å channel. From this, we find that the radio source moves with the plasmoid. The high brightness temperature profile in the range of 108 – 109 K and the moderate polarization between -50 – 30 % supports the plasma emission mechanism. Further the differential emission measure (DEM) analysis will be carried out and their results will be presented to provide more evidence of the emission mechanism.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85427", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85428" } }
{"authors":"Bella Duncan::Victoria University of Wellington--Robert Mckay::Victoria University of Wellington--James Bendle::University of Birmingham--Tim Naish::Victoria University of Wellington--Richard Levy::GNS Science--G Ventura::GNS Science--Heiko Moossen::University of Birmingham--Srinath Krishnan::Yale University--Mark Pagani::Yale University--", "title":"PP11C-06: Late Oligocene to Late Miocene Antarctic Climate Reconstructions Using Molecular and Isotopic Biomarker Proxies", "abstract":"Major climate and environmental changes occurred during late Oligocene to the late Miocene when atmospheric CO2 ranged between 500 and 300ppm, indicating threshold response of Antarctic ice sheets and climate to relatively modest CO2 variations. This implies that the southern high latitudes are highly sensitive to feedbacks associated with changes in global ice sheet and sea-ice extent, as well as terrestrial and marine ecosystems. This study focuses on two key intervals during the evolution of the Antarctic Ice Sheet: (1) The Late Oligocene and the Oligocene/Miocene boundary, when the East Antarctic Ice Sheet expanded close to present day volume following an extended period of inferred warmth. (2) The Mid-Miocene Climate Optimum (MMCO ~17-15 Ma), a period of global warmth and moderately elevated CO2 (350->500 ppm) which was subsequently followed by rapid cooling at 14-13.5 Ma. Reconstructions of climate and ice sheet variability, and thus an understanding of the various feedbacks that occurred during these intervals, are hampered by a lack of temperature and hydroclimate proxy data from the southern high latitudes. We present proxy climate reconstructions using terrestrial and marine organic biomarkers that provide new insights into Antarctica’s climate evolution, using Antarctic drill cores and outcrop samples from a range of depositional settings. Bacterial ether-lipids have been analysed to determine terrestrial mean annual temperatures and soil pH (via the methylation and cyclisation indexes of branched tetraethers – MBT and CBT, respectively). Tetraether-lipids of crenarchaeota found in marine sediments sampled from continental shelves around Antarctica have been used to derive sea surface temperatures using the TEX86 index. Compound specific stable isotopes on n-alkanes sourced from terrestrial plants have been analysed to investigate changes in the hydrological and carbon cycles.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85428", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85429" } }
{"authors":"Nicholas Butt::University of Calgary--Adam Pidlisecky::University of Calgary--Heather Ganshorn::University of Calgary--Rowan Cockett::University of Calgary--", "title":"ED53A-0850: Geo-Sandbox: An Interactive Geoscience Training Tool with Analytics to Better Understand Student Problem Solving Approaches", "abstract":"The software company 3 Point Science has developed three interactive learning programs designed to teach, test and practice visualization skills and geoscience concepts. A study was conducted with 21 geoscience students at the University of Calgary who participated in 2 hour sessions of software interaction and written pre and post-tests. Computer and SMART touch table interfaces were used to analyze user interaction, problem solving methods and visualization skills. By understanding and pinpointing user problem solving methods it is possible to reconstruct viewpoints and thought processes. This could allow us to give personalized feedback in real time, informing the user of problem solving tips and possible misconceptions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85429", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85430" } }
{"authors":"Thomas Ulizio::Montana State University--Chris Bilbrey::Montana State University--Nicholi Stoyanoff::Montana State University--Jean Dixon::Montana State University--", "title":"NH43B-1886: Using Confidence Intervals and Recurrence Intervals to Determine Precipitation Delivery Mechanisms Responsible for Mass Wasting Events.", "abstract":"Mass wasting events are geologic hazards that impact human life and property across a variety of landscapes. These movements can be triggered by tectonic activity, anomalous precipitation events, or both; acting to decrease the factor of safety ratio on a hillslope to the point of failure. There exists an active hazard landscape in the West Boulder River drainage of Park Co., MT in which the mechanisms of slope failure are unknown. It is known that region has not seen significant tectonic activity within the last decade, leaving anomalous precipitation events as the likely trigger for slope failures in the landscape. Precipitation can be delivered to a landscape via rainfall or snow; it was the aim of this study to determine the precipitation delivery mechanism most likely responsible for movements in the West Boulder drainage following the Jungle Wildfire of 2006. Data was compiled from four SNOTEL sites in the surrounding area, spanning 33 years, focusing on, but not limited to; maximum snow water equivalent (SWE) values in a water year, median SWE values on the date which maximum SWE was recorded in a water year, the total precipitation accumulated in a water year, etc. Means were computed and 99% confidence intervals were constructed around these means. Recurrence intervals and exceedance probabilities were computed for maximum SWE values and total precipitation accumulated in a water year to determine water years with anomalous precipitation. It was determined that the water year 2010-2011 received an anomalously high amount of SWE, and snow melt in the spring of this water year likely triggered recent mass waste movements. This data is further supported by Google Earth imagery, showing movements between 2009 and 2011. Return intervals for the maximum SWE value in 2010-11 for the Placer Basin SNOTEL site was 34 years, while return intervals for the Box Canyon and Monument Peak SNOTEL sites were 17.5 and 17 years respectively. Max SWE values lie outside the upper bound of the 99% confidence interval at all SNOTEL sites while precipitation accumulated in the form of rain is within the expected average, indicating an anomalously snow year and average amounts of rainfall during the same water year. This information can be used to better predict circumstances leading to slope failures in northern latitude alpine landscapes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85430", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85431" } }
{"authors":"Stephen Hart::University of California Merced--Morgan Barnes::University of California Merced--Dale Johnson::University of Nevada Reno--Matt Meadows::Pacific Gas and Electric Company--", "title":"B22D-01: The Median Isn’t the Message: Elucidating Nutrient Hot spots and Hot Moments in a Sierra Nevada Forest Soil", "abstract":"Most biogeochemical studies in forests have concentrated on nutrient pools and transformations occurring at relatively large spatial scales (i.e., stand or small catchment), over monthly or annual time scales. Many of these studies have also focused on the average or medial values observed across the spatial or temporal scale studied, discounting outliers. However, extremely high values found consistently (hot spot) or infrequently (hot moment) at a given soil microsite may be critical for nutrient acquisition by organisms and nutrient retention by terrestrial ecosystems. We have been evaluating soil nutrient hot-spot and hot-moment phenomena vertically (to a 60-cm depth) and horizontally (2-m sampling interval within a 6 m x 6 m grid) in two areas within a mixed-conifer, Sierran forest experiencing a Mediterranean-type climate. Nutrient fluxes in space and time were measured using ion exchange resin capsules placed at various depths and collected at two times (first significant precipitation in fall and post-snowmelt in spring) per year. Our previous work over a single year showed that fluxes of Ca2+ and Mg2+ in mineral soil were substantially greater in the spring than in the fall, suggesting that soil water was a major factor in controlling these nutrient fluxes. The opposite pattern was found for NH4+ and Na+, where greater fluxes occurred following the first precipitation event in fall. Here, we report new data over two additional years at these same sites. Over the entire 3-year study, nutrient fluxes were greater in the fall for all mineral soil nutrients except Ca2+ and Mg2+. Calcium fluxes were consistent with previous results; however, Mg2+ demonstrated no statistical significance between fall and spring sampling dates. Generally, the number of high statistical outliers persisted through time for Ca2+ and Mg2+, suggesting hot spots for these nutrients. In contrast, large seasonal and annual changes in the number of high statistical outliers occurred for NH4+, NO3-, and PO43-, nutrients whose availabilities are more mediated by microbial activity than base cations. Further elucidation of the mechanisms responsible for nutrient hot spot-hot moment phenomena within soil should be invaluable for improving the predictive capacity of biogeochemical models and for scaling these models across space and time.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85431", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85432" } }
{"authors":"Amanda Schwantes::Duke University--Jennifer Swenson::Duke University--Mariano González-Roglich::Duke University--Daniel Johnson::University of Idaho--Jean-Christophe Domec::Bordeaux Sciences Agro--Robert Jackson::Stanford University--", "title":"GC41C-1107: Regional Estimates of Drought-Induced Tree Canopy Loss across Texas", "abstract":"The severe drought of 2011 killed millions of trees across the state of Texas. Drought-induced tree-mortality can have significant impacts to carbon cycling, regional biophysics, and community composition. We quantified canopy cover loss across the state using remotely sensed imagery from before and after the drought at multiple scales. First, we classified ~200 orthophotos (1-m spatial resolution) from the National Agriculture Imagery Program, using a supervised maximum likelihood classification. Area of canopy cover loss in these classifications was highly correlated (R2 = 0.8) with ground estimates of canopy cover loss, measured in 74 plots across 15 different sites in Texas. These 1-m orthophoto classifications were then used to calibrate and validate coarser scale (30-m) Landsat imagery to create wall-to-wall tree canopy cover loss maps across the state of Texas. We quantified percent dead and live canopy within each pixel of Landsat to create continuous maps of dead and live tree cover, using two approaches: (1) a zero-inflated beta distribution model and (2) a random forest algorithm. Widespread canopy loss occurred across all the major natural systems of Texas, with the Edwards Plateau region most affected. In this region, on average, 10% of the forested area was lost due to the 2011 drought. We also identified climatic thresholds that controlled the spatial distribution of tree canopy loss across the state. However, surprisingly, there were many local hot spots of canopy loss, suggesting that not only climatic factors could explain the spatial patterns of canopy loss, but rather other factors related to soil, landscape, management, and stand density also likely played a role. As increases in extreme droughts are predicted to occur with climate change, it will become important to define methods that can detect associated drought-induced tree mortality across large regions. These maps could then be used (1) to quantify impacts to carbon cycling and regional biophysics, (2) to better understand the spatiotemporal dynamics of tree mortality, and (3) to calibrate and/or validate mortality algorithms in regional models.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85432", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85433" } }
{"authors":"Silke Severmann::Rutgers University--", "title":"PP34B-06: Uranium Stable Isotopes: A Proxy For Productivity Or Ocean Oxygenation?", "abstract":"Uranium elemental abundances in sediments have traditionally been used to reconstruct primary productivity and carbon flux in the ocean. 238U/235U isotope compositions, in contrast, are currently understood to reflect the extent of bottom water anoxia in the ocean. A review of our current understanding of authigenic U enrichment mechanism into reducing sediments suggests that a revision of this interpretation is warranted. Specifically, the current interpretation of U isotope effects in suboxic vs. anoxic deposits has not taken into account the well-documented linear relationship with organic C burial rates. Although organic C rain rates (i.e., surface productivity) and bottom water oxygenation are clearly related, distinction between these two environmental controls is conceptually important as it relates to the mechanism of enhanced C burial and ultimately the strength of the biological pump. Here we will review new and existing data to test the hypothesis that the isotope composition of authigenic U in reducing sediments are best described by their relationship with parameters related to organic carbon delivery and burial, rather than bottom water oxygen concentration.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85433", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85434" } }
{"authors":"Yosuke Nagasaka::Port and Airport Research Institute--Atsushi Nozu::Port and Airport Research Institute--", "title":"S43B-2785: Strong Ground Motion Simulation for the Mw5.9 Central Chiba Earthquake of JULY 23, 2005 with Pseudo Point-Source Model", "abstract":"The pseudo point-source model is a source model for strong ground motion simulation proposed by Nozu(2012), originally for megathrust earthquakes. In this model, a simple source spectrum that follows the omega square model is given to each subevent without considering detailed spacio-temporal slip distributions; thus, the model is simpler compared to the characterized source model in which subevents are divided into subfaults. In the pseudo point-source model, the Fourier amplitude at a target station is evaluated by multiplying the path effect and the site amplification factor with the source spectrum explained above. Then, the waveform in the time domain is synthesized by inverse Fourier transform to the amplitude combined with phase characteristics properly selected from past records at the same station. The model has successfully been applied to several earthquakes in Japan including shallow crustal, subduction and intraslab earthquakes. In this study, the pseudo point-source model was applied to the Mw5.9 Central Chiba earthquake of JULY 23, 2005 to check its validity for intraslab earthquakes occurring beneath the metropolitan area and to find possible error sources. The overall result showed good agreement with the observations in terms of both Fourier spectrum and velocity time history (Figure); however, some unfavorable trends were found in the results. One was that the Fourier spectrum was underestimated at farther stations and at higher frequencies over 2 Hz. The discrepancy was significantly mitigated by revising the Q value from 100×f0.7 to 110×f1.0. The result indicates that the Q value has to be determined carefully when simulating ground motions in a wide area where the hypocentral distance exceeds 200 km. Another trend was the overestimation around 1 Hz at stations to the north of the epicenter. This could probably be attributed to the backward directivity effect or the variation in the site amplification factors and should be investigated further in the future study.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85434", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85435" } }
{"authors":"Benedikt Fest::University of Melbourne--Timothy Wardlaw::Forestry Tasmania--Nina Hinko-Najera::The University of Melbourne--Stefan Arndt::University of Melbourne--", "title":"B13D-0653: The Relationship Between Soil Air Filled Porosity and Soil Methane Oxidation is Almost Identical in Both Dry and Wet Temperate Eucalypt Forests", "abstract":"In order to gain a better understanding of the temporal variation in soil methane (CH4) exchange in temperate evergreen eucalypt forests in south-eastern Australia we measured soil CH4 exchange in high temporal resolution (every 2 hours or less) over two consecutive years (Wombat State Forest, Victoria, AUS) and over one year (Warra, Tasmania, AUS) in two temperate Eucalyptus obliqua (L. Her) forests with contrasting annual precipitation (Wombat State Forest = 870 mm yr-1, Warra = 1700 mm yr-1). Both forests were continuous CH4 sinks with the Victorian site having a sink strength of -1.79 kg CH4 ha-1 yr-1 and the Tasmanian site having a sink strength of -3.83 kg CH4 ha-1 yr-1. Our results show that CH4 uptake was strongly controlled by soil moisture at both sites and explained up to 90% of the temporal variability in CH4 uptake. Furthermore, when soil moisture was expressed as soil air filled porosity (AFP) we were able to predict the CH4 uptake of one site by the linear regression between AFP and CH4 uptake from the other site. Soil temperature only had an apparent control over seasonal variation in CH4 uptake during periods when soil moisture and soil temperature were closely correlated. The fluctuation of the generally low soil nitrogen levels did not influence soil CH4 uptake at either site.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85435", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85436" } }
{"authors":"Alberto Lopez::University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez--Silvia Chacon::RONMAC/SINAMOT--Natalia Zamora::Helmholtz Centre Potsdam GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences--Franck Audemard::FUNVISIS--Frederic Dondin::University of the West Indies--Valerie Clouard::Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris--Finn Løvholt::Norwegian Geotechnical Institute--Carl Harbitz::Norwegian Geotechnical Institute--Elizabeth Vanacore::Puerto Rico Seismic Network--Victor Huerfano Moreno::University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez--", "title":"T11E-2942: Tsunamis from Tectonic Sources along Caribbean Plate Boundaries", "abstract":"The Working Group 2 (WG2) of the Intergovernmental Coordination Group for the Tsunami and Other Coastal Hazards Warning System for the Caribbean and Adjacent Regions (ICG/CARIBE-EWS) in charge of Tsunami Hazards Assessment, has generated a list of tsunami sources for the Caribbean region. Simulating these worst-case, most credible scenarios would provide an estimate of the resulting effects on coastal areas within the Caribbean. In the past few years, several publications have addressed this issue resulting in a collection of potential tsunami sources and scenarios. These publications come from a wide variety of sources; from government agencies to academic institutions. Although these provide the scientific community with a list of sources and scenarios, it was the interest of the WG2 to evaluate what has been proposed and develop a comprehensive list of sources, therefore leaving aside proposed scenarios. The seismo-tectonics experts of the Caribbean within the WG2 members were tasked to evaluate comprehensively which published sources are credible, worst-cases, and consider other sources that have been omitted from available reports. Among these published sources are the GEM Faulted Earth Subduction Characterization Project, and the LANTEX/Caribe Wave annual exercise publications (2009-2015). Caribbean tectonic features capable of generating tsunamis from seismic dislocation are located along the Northeastern Caribbean, the Lesser Antilles Trench, and the Panamá and Southern Caribbean Deformed Belts. The proposed sources have been evaluated based on historical and instrumental seismicity as well as geological and geophysical studies. This paper presents the sources and their justification as most-probable tsunami sources based on the context of crustal deformation due to Caribbean plate interacting with neighboring North and South America plates. Simulations of these sources is part of a subsequent phase in which effects of these tectonically induced tsunamis are evaluated in the near-field, and wave history snapshots are used to estimate arrival times and coastal effects at other locations within the Caribbean basin. This study is part of a contribution of the WG2 of ICG/CARIBE-EWS to UNESCO’s Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85436", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85437" } }
{"authors":"Alan Foreman::Scripps Institution of Oceanography--Christopher Charles::Scripps Institution of Oceanography--James Rae::University of St Andrews--Jess Adkins::California Institute of Technology--Niall Slowey::Texas A & M University--", "title":"PP53C-2373: Evolution of Temperature and Carbon Storage Within the Deep Southeast Atlantic Ocean Across the Last Glacial/Interglacial Cycle Inferred from a Highly-Resolved Sedimentary Depth Transect", "abstract":"Many models show that the relative intensity of stratification is a primary variable governing the sequestration and release of carbon from the ocean over ice ages. The wide-scale observations necessary to test these model-derived hypotheses are not yet sufficient, but sedimentary depth transects represent a promising approach for making progress. Here we present paired stable isotopic (d18O, d13C) and trace metal data (Mg/Ca, B/Ca) from benthic foraminifera collected from a highly vertically-resolved depth transect from the mid-depth and deep SE Atlantic. These observations, which cover Marine Isotope Stages 5e, 5d, 5a, 4, and the Last Glacial Maximum, document the evolution of glacial conditions from the previous interglacial, and provide detailed observations regarding the magnitude and timing of changes in temperature and salinity within the deep ocean at key time points over the last glacial/interglacial cycle. Furthermore, the comparison between purely ‘physical’ tracers (i.e. Mg/Ca, d18O) and tracers sensitive to the carbon cycle (i.e. d13C and B/Ca) provides critical insight into the relationship between deep/mid-depth stratification and global carbon dynamics. Notably among our observations, the paired stable isotope and trace metal results strongly suggest that much of the ice-age cooling of deep South Atlantic occurred at the MIS 5e/5d transition, while the onset of salinity stratification in the mid-depth South Atlantic occurred at the MIS 5/4 transition.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85437", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85438" } }
{"authors":"Toshihiro Kuwayama::California Air Resources Board--Jessica Charrier-Klobas::California Air Resources Board--Ying Hsu::California Air Resources Board--Matthias Falk::California Air Resources Board--Thomas Pongetti::JPL--Jorn Herner::California Air Resources Board--Abhilash Vijayan::California Air Resources Board--", "title":"A21H-0256: Top-Down Evaluation of Nitrous Oxide Emissions in Los Angeles Basin", "abstract":"Nitrous oxide (N2O) is a potent long-lived greenhouse gas (GHG) that accounted for 3% of California’s GHG emissions in 2013 1 , 2 . It has been postulated that anthropogenic N2O emissions may be larger than previously estimated. To evaluate this hypothesis, long-term measurements of N2O and carbon monoxide (CO) concentrations were obtained at Mt. Wilson Monitoring Site between 2012 and 2015. This site provided a suitable location to study the regionally well-mixed urban emissions from the Los Angeles Basin. The resulting dataset was analyzed to investigate the monthly N2O trends and seasonal variability of urban N2O emissions in the region. N2O:CO orthogonal regression slopes, integrated with regional CO emissions data 3 (as an urban pollution surrogate), were used to estimate the top-down N2O emissions from the Los Angeles Basin. The results from this top-down analysis were also analyzed to evaluate the various source sectors in the Los Angeles Basin.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85438", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85439" } }
{"authors":"David Brankovits::Texas A & M University at Galveston--John Pohlman::USGS Coastal and Marine Science Center Woods Hole--Laura Lapham::UMCES, Chesapeake Bio. Lab--Michael Casso::USGS Coastal and Marine Science Center Woods Hole--Eric Roth::Onset Computer Corporation--Nicholas Lowell::Lowell Instruments LLC--Thomas Iliffe::Texas A & M University at Galveston--", "title":"B51B-0433: High-resolution chemical and hydrologic records identify environmental factors that control coastal anchialine cave ecosystem function", "abstract":"Anchialine caves host a coastal aquifer ecosystem occupied by cave-adapted crustaceans that reside within distinct fresh, brackish and marine waters. Our initial investigation of this subsurface ecotone in the Yucatan Peninsula (Mexico) provides stable isotope-based evidence that methane and dissolved organic carbon (DOC) are the primary sources of energy and carbon for the food web. However, the frequency of observations is sparse, leaving us ‘in the dark’ with respect to the temporal dynamics of the ecosystem function. In this study, we obtained undisturbed vertical profiles of methane, DOC and DIC concentration and isotopic composition with the ‘Octopipi’ water sampler from an anchialine cave located ~8 km from the coastline. To document the temporal variability of methane availability in the cave, we deployed an osmotically-driven pump (OsmoSampler). Data loggers recorded dissolved oxygen (DO), salinity, temperature and current velocities, and a rain gauge recorded precipitation. A high-methane water mass near the ceiling (up to 7795 nM) contained elevated concentration (900 µM), 13C-depleted (-27.8 to -28.2 ‰) DOC, suggesting terrestrial organic matter input from the overlying soils. Low-methane saline water (36 to 84 nM) had lower concentration DOC (15 to 97 µM) with a similar δ13C (-25.9 to -27.2 ‰), suggesting significant terrestrial organic matter consumption or removal with increasing depth, from fresh to saline water, within the water column. Our 6-month water chemistry record reveals high concentrations of methane in the wet season, especially following rainfall events, and relatively lower methane concentrations in the dry season. These observations suggest rain flushes methane generated in overlying anoxic soils into the cave. DO, water level, and groundwater flow patterns were also linked to the precipitation record. These data provide novel insight into the interconnections between external climate forcing and subterranean anchialine ecosystems within coastal aquifers.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85439", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85440" } }
{"authors":"Reza Ziazi::Oregon State University--James Liburdy::Oregon State University--Sourabh Apte::Oregon State University--Brian Wood::Oregon State University--", "title":"H23I-02: Particle image velocimetry measurement of steady, transitional, and turbulent flow in a randomly packed porous media", "abstract":"The sequential transient regime of the flow through randomly packed porous media has been observed experimentally from steady inertial to turbulent flow. Considering the inherent constraints in visualization and measurements in porous media, the characterization has been performed using time resolved PIV in a randomly packed ordered array of spheres with uniform size. The size of the spheres are 15 mm and the pore Reynolds numbers are set to be 300, 500, and 900. The test bed has a cross-section of 70×70 mm and a height of 15mm. In addition to the difficult accessibility to the interrogation window, the challenges of visualizing the flow in this porous structure is matching of refractive indices of the fluid and solid phase as slight mismatches have been shown to cause significant tracking errors. The 2-D velocity field has been captured at discrete planar locations along the optical axis through the test bed to study the physics and statistics of the flow. Variations occur in the imaging magnification, and if not taken into consideration may lead to increased error. This study addresses three forms of error in PIV as they pertain to porous media flow: tracking error, bias error due to displacement gradients and perspective error. The bias error due to displacement gradients was evaluated from correlation peak width. Direct Numerical Simulation is also being performed to investigate the transitional and turbulent flow in porous media in detail.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85440", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85441" } }
{"authors":"Megan Smith::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--Yue Hao::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--Harris Mason::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--Susan Carroll::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--", "title":"H41C-1307: An Integrated Approach to Predicting Carbon Dioxide Storage Capacity in Carbonate Reservoirs", "abstract":"Carbonate reservoirs are widespread globally but pose unique challenges for geologic carbon dioxide (CO2) storage due to the reactive nature of carbonate minerals and the inherently heterogeneous pore structures of these rock types. Carbonate mineral dissolution resulting from CO2-acidified fluids may actually create new storage capacity, but predicting the extent and location of enhanced storage is complicated by the presence of pore size distributions spanning orders of magnitude as well as common microfractures. To address this issue, core samples spanning a wide range of depths and predicted permeabilities were procured from wells drilled into the Weyburn-Midale reservoir from the IEA GHG's CO2 Monitoring and Storage Project, Saskatchewan, Canada; and from the Arbuckle dolomite at the Kansas Geological Survey's South-central Kansas CO2 Project. Our approach integrated non-invasive characterization, complex core-flooding experiments, and 3-D reactive transport simulations to calibrate relevant CO2 storage relationships among fluid flow, porosity, permeability, and chemical reactivity. The resulting observations from this work permit us to constrain (and place uncertainty limits on) some of the model parameters needed for estimating evolving reservoir CO2 storage capacity. The challenge remains, however, as to how to best interpret and implement these observations at the actual reservoir scale. We present our key findings from these projects and recommendations for storage capacity predictions. This work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85441", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85442" } }
{"authors":"Joshua Larsen::University of Queensland--Ben (Abdollah) Jarihani::University of Queensland--", "title":"H11C-1364: Do changes in global biomass have a detectable impact on the water balance?", "abstract":"Recent studies have shown a wide range of decadal scale global biomass changes, with many boreal forests increasing in biomass, and tropical areas continuing to decline. A critical question that follows from this is whether or not these changes are having a measurable impact on the water balance. Here, we use a Budyko approach in combination with global datasets of precipitation (P), potential evaporation (PET), discharge (Q), and actual evapotranspiration (ET) to assess whether detectable trends in surface runoff exist, and whether this is consistent with the availability predicted by the Budyko water and energy balance. These trends are further complicated by the scaling of hydrological change with climate (PET/P), and the wide variation in climate trends, particularly P. Nonetheless, the detection of hydrological responses to vegetation change at the global scale is a large gap in our understanding of human impacts on the hydrological cycle, and this work seeks to clarify when and where such impacts may be present. This has important implications for future water resource availability, since biomass (or land cover) changes are not considered to the same extent as the potential impact of greenhouse gas emissions, and yet vegetation changes may have a far more direct and influential role in the hydrological cycle.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85442", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85443" } }
{"authors":"Reyna Jenkyns::Ocean Networks Canada--Meghan Tomlin::Ocean Networks Canada--Ross Timmerman::Ocean Networks Canada--", "title":"IN33B-1806: Digital Curation of Marine Physical Samples at Ocean Networks Canada", "abstract":"Ocean Networks Canada (ONC) has collected hundreds of geological, biological and fluid samples from the water column and seafloor during its maintenance expeditions. These samples have been collected by Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROVs), divers, networked and autonomously deployed instruments, and rosettes. Subsequent measurements are used for scientific experiments, calibration of in-situ and remote sensors, monitoring of Marine Protected Areas, and environment characterization. Tracking the life cycles of these samples from collection to dissemination of results with all the pertinent documents (e.g., protocols, imagery, reports), metadata (e.g., location, identifiers, purpose, method) and data (e.g., measurements, taxonomic classification) is a challenge. The initial collection of samples is normally documented in SeaScribe (an ROV dive logging tool within ONC’s Oceans 2.0 software) for which ONC has defined semantics and syntax. Next, samples are often sent to individual scientists and institutions (e.g., Royal BC Museum) for processing and storage, making acquisition of results and life cycle metadata difficult. Finally, this information needs to be retrieved and collated such that multiple user scenarios can be addressed. ONC aims to improve and extend its digital infrastructure for physical samples to support this complex array of samples, workflows and applications. However, in order to promote effective data discovery and exchange, interoperability and community standards must be an integral part of the design. Thus, integrating recommendations and outcomes of initiatives like the EarthCube iSamples working groups are essential. Use cases, existing tools, schemas and identifiers are reviewed, while remaining gaps and challenges are identified. The current status, selected approaches and possible future directions to enhance ONC’s digital infrastructure for each sample type are presented.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85443", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85445" } }
{"authors":"Akiyo Yatagai::Solar-Terrestrial Environment Laboratory--Masahito Ishihara::JICA--Akira Watanabe::Fukushima University--Masatoshi Yamauchi::IRF Swedish Institute of Space Physics Kiruna--", "title":"B11K-01: Development of observed meteorological database to understand the deposition and dispersion processes over Fukushima and Kanto plain of Japan in March 2011", "abstract":"Meteorological simulations and understanding of the distribution of radioactive compounds depends on the accurate simulation of precipitation and on information regarding the timing of the emission of these radioactive pollutants from the power plant. Furthermore, three-dimensional rain drop and even fog information should be essentially important for understanding the wet deposition processes, since the initial drizzle is not measured by the tipping bucket-type raingauge. We have developed various meteorological information links (http://www.chikyu.ac.jp/akiyo/firis/) and original radar and precipitation data will be released from the page. Here we present various radar images that we have prepared for March 2011. We prepared three-dimensional radar reflectivity of the C-band radar of JMA in every 10 minutes over all Kanto Plain centered at Tokyo and Fukushima prefecture centered at Sendai. We have released images of each altitude (1km interval) for 15th - 16thand 21th March (http://sc-web.nict.go.jp/fukushima/). The vertical structure of the rainfall is almost the same at 4km with the surface and sporadic high precipitation is observed at 6 km height for 15-16th. While, generally precipitation pattern that is similar to the surface is observed at 5km height on 21th. On the other hand, an X-band radar centered at Fukushima university is also used to know more localized raindrop patterns at zenith angle of 4 degree. We prepared 10-minutes/120m mesh precipitation patterns for March 15th, 16th, 17th, 18th, 20th, 21th, 22th and 23th. Quantitative estimate is difficult from this X-band radar, but localized structure, especially for the rain-band along Nakadori (middle valley in Fukushima prefecture), that is considered to determine the highly contaminated zone, is observed with only this X-band radar in the mid-night (JST) of 15th. We will show the movie of how precipitation systems were moved at the meeting. We are preparing rain/snow amount information and fog information during March 2011, and are going to compare them with atmospheric electricity fields that can be used for the index of dry deposition. The comprehensive datasets will reveal how the pollutants were moved and deposited, and will be used to improve atmospheric transport models.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85445", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85446" } }
{"authors":"Maria Flatau::US Naval Research Laboratory--", "title":"OS51A-1977: THE INTERACTION OF EASTWARD PROPAGATING EQUATORIAL MODES WITH THE MARITIME CONTINENT", "abstract":"We examine the processes that contribute to blocking of the eastward propagating equatorial modes by the Maritime Continent. The recent study by Baranowski at al (2015) have shown that the propgation of Kelvin waves through the Maritime Continent is strongly influenced by the interaction of the waves with the diurnnal cycle of convection over the land which can either amplify or supress the convective forcing of the wave. This suggests that inorder for the wave to cross the Maritime Continent it has to be in phase with local convection. Another possible mechanism through which the Maritime Continent can influence approaching Kelvin waves and MJO's is their interacton with cyclonic disturbances generated by the lee vortices at the tips of Sumatra. Both of these mechanisms can be misrepresented by dynamic models and contribute to predictability barrier in this region These equatorial modes ate examined in Navy models forecasts of DYNAMO MJOs and n idealized experiments. While the models appear to predict the MJO and Kelvin wave approach to the Maritime continent their propagation is too slowa andn westward propagating disturbance are often too strong. We examine the contribution of lee vortices and local diurnal convection variability to this process", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85446", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85447" } }
{"authors":"Jacob Seeley::University of California Berkeley--David Romps::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"A41J-0214: Clausius-Clapeyron Scaling of Convective Available Potential Energy (CAPE) in Cloud-Resolving Simulations", "abstract":"Recent work by Singh and O'Gorman has produced a theory for convective available potential energy (CAPE) in radiative-convective equilibrium. In this model, the atmosphere deviates from a moist adiabat—and, therefore, has positive CAPE—because entrainment causes evaporative cooling in cloud updrafts, thereby steepening their lapse rate. This has led to the proposal that CAPE increases with global warming because the strength of evaporative cooling scales according to the Clausius-Clapeyron (CC) relation. However, CAPE could also change due to changes in cloud buoyancy and changes in the entrainment rate, both of which could vary with global warming. To test the relative importance of changes in CAPE due to CC scaling of evaporative cooling, changes in cloud buoyancy, and changes in the entrainment rate, we subject a cloud-resolving model to a suite of natural (and unnatural) forcings. We find that CAPE changes are primarily driven by changes in the strength of evaporative cooling; the effect of changes in the entrainment rate and cloud buoyancy are comparatively small. This builds support for CC scaling of CAPE.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85447", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85448" } }
{"authors":"Thanos Papanicolaou::University of Tennessee--", "title":"PA23B-2192: Adopt to sustain: The effect of biophysical and socioeconomic context on the ability of two contrasting U.S. agroecosystems to respond to changes", "abstract":"Increased demand for food, feed, fuel and fiber in U.S. agroecosystems has deleterious effects on the environment. Gauging the responses of these agroecosystems in the presence of extreme events and new market demands requires a fresh approach. This approach requires better comprehension of the interactions and feedback processes that either sustain or deplete both natural (e.g., soil productivity) and human (e.g., net income) capital. Because soil quality defines land productivity and long-term prosperity, we focus on the cascading effects that soil quality has on other ecosystem properties, profit, farmer decision making in mitigating soil degradation, and development of environmental policies. We argue that land use decision-making must not only be strictly based on socioeconomic and environmental criteria, but should also consider farmer/ farm characteristics, personal beliefs, and the support network that is needed for promoting and implementing conservation practices. Current approaches for adopting conservation do not fit into this paradigm. We develop an Agent Based Model Framework that incorporates novel aspects of ecological, socioeconomic and behavioral modeling to facilitate interactions of the farmer and its land through a multi-objective, maximization utility function. This function is continuously informed and updated by the improved modeling framework. This study is developing measures of sustainability for lags, hysteresis, tipping points, and adaptive capacity. We examine the complex relationship between farmer decision-making and the landscape in two contrasting systems in Iowa and Tennessee with unique distributions of characteristics in terms of climate, soil properties, and landscape patterns that regulate not only the type of farming practiced, but also the degree of soil erosion in each system. Central to this investigation is identifying and quantifying trade-offs among non-pecuniary and pecuniary objectives given alternative scenarios about driving forces and stakeholder preference. Trade-offs among the various products and services produced by landscapes are required and finding the proper balance presents a continual challenge for policy-makers and land managers when it comes to placing best management practices in a watershed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85448", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85450" } }
{"authors":"Yafang Guo::Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University--", "title":"SA13A-2334: Model studies of gravity wave influences on the atmospheric sodium layer", "abstract":"A time-dependent nonlinear chemical-dynamical model is used for investigating the sodium chemistry and dynamical characteristics of gravity waves in the mesopause region. From the observations by Na lidar, we know that gravity waves play an important role in the vertical transport of atmospheric constituents. However, the transport induced by the chemical reactions is poorly known and it might also affect the distribution of mesospheric constituents a lot. It is important to fully understand the dynamical and chemical influences by the gravity waves. Besides, Lidar also observed some Na layers in the lower thermosphere extended to 150km. By developing this nonlinear model, more atmospheric processes can be simulated and explained.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85450", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85451" } }
{"authors":"Tara Jonell::Louisiana State University--Peter Clift::Louisiana State University--Andrew Carter::Birkbeck, University of London--", "title":"EP41A-0908: Controls on Quaternary Sediment Erosion and Provenance in the Himalayan Rain Shadow, Zanskar River, Northwest India", "abstract":"The Asian Summer Monsoon exerts strong control over erosion in the frontal Himalaya and possibly farther onto the periphery of the Tibetan Plateau in the Himalayan rain shadow. This study evaluates the Zanskar River, a large rain shadow tributary to the Indus River system, to establish how monsoonal precipitation controls erosion patterns, sediment yield, and sediment composition in the Himalayan rain shadow. Bulk sediment petrography and U-Pb detrital zircon ages demonstrate that Zanskar River sands are overwhelmingly dominated by 600–850 Ma zircon, which is consistent with material eroding from Greater Himalayan lithologies. In particular, modern sediment production appears to be heavily concentrated in the wettest and most glaciated subcatchment. River terrace sands indicate that no significant change in the area of sediment production and basin-wide provenance signal has occurred since ~11.5 ka, despite changes in monsoon strength. Variability in subcatchment provenance signals, however, do shift locally with enhanced precipitation around the time of the Monsoon Maximum (10–8 ka). Detrital apatite fission track ages suggest rates of erosion typical for the northwest Indian Himalaya for the last 6.4 M.y. in Zanskar, in spite of the changing monsoonal climate. Together these data indicate most sediment in the Zanskar River is freshly-eroded and transmitted immediately downstream into the Indus River with only modest buffering in terraces.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85451", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85452" } }
{"authors":"Joseph Mangano::USGS Oregon Water Science Center--Krista Jones::USGS Oregon Water Science Center--Rose Wallick::USGS Oregon Water Science Center--Leslie Bach::The Nature Conservancy--Melissa Olson::The Nature Conservancy--Heather Bervid::USGS Oregon Water Science Center--", "title":"EP43B-0974: Assessing Geomorphic and Vegetative Responses to Environmental Flows in the Willamette River Basin", "abstract":"On regulated rivers, restoring flow regimes is a process-based restoration approach that may strongly affect downstream ecosystems. Developing realistic flow targets with meaningful geomorphic and ecological benefits, however, is challenging. For instance, hydraulic, geomorphic and biological processes are affected by more than manipulating water release—sediment supply and transport conditions also require consideration. Also, funding and programmatic directives rarely require the monitoring necessary to adaptively manage environmental flow programs. Recent research in the Willamette River basin in support of the Sustainable Rivers Project (SRP) demonstrates how such a monitoring program can be implemented. At the reach scale, initial efforts have assessed geomorphic and vegetative changes in alluvial sections of the Middle Fork Willamette and McKenzie Rivers using repeat mapping from aerial photographs and flow analyses. Overall, both rivers are largely stable because of reduced discharge, bed-material supply and local revetments, but some reaches of the McKenzie River are more dynamic, perhaps reflecting greater inputs of sediment from unregulated tributaries and higher magnitude peak flows. Repeat, reach-scale mapping on the Middle Fork Willamette River shows that frequent bankfull flows are able to scour minimally vegetated gravel bars and sustain a patchwork of actively shifting bed-material sediment. Repeat mapping on the McKenzie River in summer 2015 will reveal insights about the geomorphic effectiveness of bankfull flows. At the site scale, monitoring at two bars in summer 2015 is linking streamflow with the establishment of black cottonwood. Lastly, a review of hydrographs from 2000-2015 and retrospectively applying stakeholder-defined flow targets showed substantial variability in meeting objectives for the timing and types of flows under traditional regulated conditions and the SRP. Altogether, these related efforts help link streamflow, geomorphic processes, and black cottonwood establishment over three decades, and help refine ongoing and future environmental flow releases to achieve the goals of the SRP.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85452", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85453" } }
{"authors":"Reko Hynönen::Finnish Meteorological Institute--Eija Tanskanen::Finnish Meteorological Institute--Patrizia Francia::University of L'Aquila--", "title":"SM21A-2461: Variation of Ultra-Low Frequency Waves within Solar Wind and Pc5 Fluctuations on the Ground in High Latitudes during Solar Cycle 23", "abstract":"Ultra-low frequency (ULF) waves in the magnetosphere can be significant for the diffusion of energy and particles in the outer radiation belt. We present a statistical comparison of ULF wave power within the solar wind and in the magnetosphere during years 1998-2008. Data from Advanced Composite Explorer (ACE) spacecraft MAG and SWE experiments is used to examine the solar wind ULF structure and on the ground Kevo magnetometer was used to examine the Pc5 power. We determined the monthly average power in the Pc5 range (2-7 mHz) using Fast Fourier Transforms and study its yearly and monthly variation. We find that ULF power in solar wind is large during the years of declining sunspot phase 2002-2004 in both solar wind and on the ground and that the monthly averages peak at the same times. A close correlation of ULF power in solar wind and on the ground is found in the minimum years 2006-2008. We also report a winter maximum between 2001 and 2006 in the Pc5 power at Kevo.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85453", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85454" } }
{"authors":"Alan Rice::Consultant Sustainability Issues--", "title":"GC51A-1080: Can Cooler Heads Prevail?", "abstract":"The significant correlation between dropping temperatures throughout the Pliocene and the concomitant explosive expansion of the Hominid brain has led a number of workers to postulate climate change drove human evolution. Our brain (that of Homo sapiens), comprises 1-2 percent of our body weight but consumes 20 -25 percent of the body’s caloric intake. We are “hotheads”. Brains are extremely sensitive to overheating but we are endowed with unparalleled thermal regulation, much of it given over to protecting the Central Nervous System (CNS). Will there be reversed trends with global warming? The human brain has been shrinking since the end of the Ice Ages, losing about 150cc over the past 10,000 years. Polar bear skulls have been downsizing as well. Almost all mass extinctions or evolutionary upheavals are attributed to global warming: e.g. the Permian/Triassic (P/T) event, i.e., “The Great Dying”, 250 million years ago (~90% of all life forms wiped out); the Paleocene/ Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM) 55 million years ago. They may be analogs for what might await us. Large creatures, whose body size inhibits cooling, melted away during the PETM. Horses, initially the size of dogs then, reduced to the size of cats. An unanticipated hazard for humans that may attend extreme global warming is dumbing down or needing to retreat to the Poles as did those creatures that survived the P/T event (some references: http://johnhawks.net/research/hawks-2011-brain-size-selection-holocene ; Kandel, E. et al Principles of Neural Science 4th ed. New York (US): McGraw-Hill, 2000; Selective Brain Cooling in Early Hominids:phylogenetic and evolutionary implications, Reeser, H., reeser@flmnh.ufl.edu; How the body controls brain temperature; the temperature shielding effect of cerebral blood flow, Mingming Z. et al. J Appl Physiol. 2006 November; 101(5): 1481–1488; news.nationalgeographic.com/ news/2014/03/140327-climate-change-shrinks-salamanders-global-warming-science/; Heat illness and heat stroke, www.ozemedicine.com/wiki/doku.php?id=heat illness 7/3/2010)", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85454", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85455" } }
{"authors":"Hongyu Guo::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--Rodney J Weber::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--Athanasios Nenes::Georgia Institute of Technology--Amy Sullivan::Colorado State University--Joel Thornton::Univ Washington - Seattle--Felipe Lopez-Hilfiker::University of Washington Seattle Campus--Jose-Luis Jimenez::Harvard University--Pedro Campuzano Jost::University of Colorado Boulder--Jason Schroder::Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences--Jack Dibb::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--", "title":"A41K-0216: Particle pH Inferred from Aircraft Data: Validation and Geographical, Vertical and Seasonal Characteristics with Case Studies from the WINTER Campaign", "abstract":"Particle pH is a critical but poorly understood factor that affects many aerosol processes and properties, including aerosol composition, concentrations, geochemical cycles, and aerosol toxicity. Here we assess the prediction of pH from aircraft data, report pH as a function of geographical location and altitude for different seasons, and investigate causes for variability in pH-dependent aerosol components, such as nitrate. pH is generally predicted with a thermodynamic model since it is difficult to measure directly. We used ISORROPIA-II with particle and selected gas inorganic species, along with RH and T as inputs to calculate aerosol pH. Data are from three aircraft studies: WINTER (2015 Feb-Mar) and NEAQS (2004 July-Aug), both over the northeastern US, and SENEX (2013 Jun-July) over the southeastern US. pH was validated by comparing measured and predicted partitioning of ammonia and nitric acid. The effect of inevitable sample heating associated with aircraft measurements was minimal since partitioning of measured semi-volatile components based on ambient T and RH were accurately predicted. Overall, pH determined from WINTER, NEAQS, and SENEX for altitudes up to 5000 m ranged between -0.4 and 1.9 (10-90% percentiles, mean±SD=0.9±1.0), similar to what we have observed at ground-based sites in the southeastern US. Coupling between water vapor concentrations, temperature, particle composition, liquid water content and particle pH on partitioning of nitric acid-nitrate observed during the WINTER campaign will be investigated.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85455", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85456" } }
{"authors":"Ivan Ortega::University of Colorado at Boulder--Natalie Kille::University of Colorado at Boulder--Sunil Baidar::University of Colorado at Boulder--Roman Sinreich::University of Colorado at Boulder--James Hannigan::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Frank Hase::Karlsruhe Institute of Technology--Rainer M Volkamer::University of Colorado at Boulder--", "title":"A41A-0049: Evaluation of a Remote Sensing Instrument Suite to Measure Gas Columns from a Mobile Laboratory", "abstract":"An innovative suite of remote sensing instruments has been deployed in a mobile laboratory to conduct column measurements. A mobile solar tracker is simultaneously coupled to a Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer (FTS) and a UV-Vis Spectrometer allowing to measure ammonia (NH3), ethane (C2H6), formaldehyde and nitrogen dioxide (NO2) along the direct solar beam. The fast scanning mobile solar tracker contains a motion compensation system and imaging feedback loop making it possible to operate autonomously and to track the sun at high precision; 0.052° has been verified comparing quantitatively the column measurements of NO2 from the UV-Vis spectrometer with measurements from the Multi Axis Differential Optical Absorption Spectrometer (MAX-DOAS), the third remote sensing instrument deployed in the mobile laboratory. The solar tracker enables direct sun observations providing high photon flux such that the FTS and UV-Vis spectrometer measure at high temporal resolution of 2 seconds. Driving the mobile lab yields high spatial resolution. The suite of remote sensing instruments aboard the mobile laboratory allows quantifying emissions applying the Solar Occultation Flux method. This method applied to the column measurements is complementary to in-situ observations in obtaining trace gas fluxes and eventually trace gas production rates from a source when driving around or upwind and downwind of that target source. This presentation characterizes the FTS by comparing it with a high resolution FTS at the National Center for Atmospheric Research, and describes the first application to measurements of NH3 emissions from agricultural sources and C2H6 emissions from oil and natural gas.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85456", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85457" } }
{"authors":"Andres Sanchez::Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico--Daniel Cerqueda-Garcia::Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico--Luisa Falcón::UNAM National Autonomous University of Mexico--Roberto Iglesias-Prieto::UNAM National Autonomous University of Mexico--", "title":"OS31A-1977: Metagenomic and ecophysiological analysis of biofilms colonizing coral substrates: ` Life after death of coral` ", "abstract":"Coral reefs are the most productive ecosystems on the planet and are the most important carbonated structures of biological origin. However, global warming is affecting the health and functionality of these ecosystems. Specifically, most of the Acropora sp. stony corals have declined their population all over the Mexican Caribbean in more than ~80% of their original coverage, resulting in vast extensions of dead coral rubble. When the coral dies, the skeleton begins to be colonized by algae, sponges, bacteria and others, forming a highly diverse biofilm. We analyzed the metagenomes of the dead A. palmata rubbles from Puerto Morelos, in the Mexican Caribbean. Also, we quantified the elemental composition of biomass and measured nitrogen fixation and emission of greenhouse gases over 24 hrs. This works provides information on how the community is composed and functions after the death of the coral, visualizing a possible picture for a world without coral reefs.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85457", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85458" } }
{"authors":"Juhan Park::Seoul National University--Taekyu Kim::NIER National Institute of Environmental Research--Sungsik Cho::Seoul National University--Daun Ryu::Seoul National University--Minkyu Moon::Seoul National University--Hyun Seok Kim::Seoul National University--", "title":"B31B-0543: Effects of thinning intensities on transpiration and productivity of 50-year-old Pinus koraeinsis stands", "abstract":"This study investigated the effects of thinning intensities on stand transpiration and productivity of 50-year-old Korean pine forests for three years. Forest thinning, which remove some fraction of trees from stand, alters the microclimatic conditions such as radiation distribution within canopy, vapor pressure deficit, and amount of available soil water. These changes influence on the tree water use, and related tree growth. Thinning was conducted on March, 2012 with two intensities (Control, Light-thinning, and Heavy-thinning). Transpiration was estimated from sap flux density, which was measured with Granier-type thermal dissipation sensors. Tree diameter growth was measured with dendrometer, and converted to tree productivity using allometric equations developed specifically in our study sites. The climatic conditions showed remarkable differences among three years. In 2012, total precipitation was highest but spring was dry. 2013 was normal year with frequent rain events. In contrast, 2014 was hot and extremely dry. Stand transpiration was initially decreased ca. 20% and 42% on light-thinning and heavy-thinning stand, respectively. In second year, it gradually recovered in both thinning intensities, and was 19% and 37% lower on light-thinning and heavy-thinning stand, respectively. However, the recovery trends were different between two thinning intensities. Transpiration of heavy-thinning stand was recovered slowly than that of light thinning stand. In 2014, heavy-thinning stand transpired ca. 5% more than control plot in early growing season, but severe drought had negative effects that caused reduction of stand transpiration in thinned stand on late growing season. The tree-level productivity was increased initially ca. 24% and 28% on light-thinning and heavy-thinning stand, respectively. During the following growing seasons, this thinning-induced enhancement of productivity was diminished in light-thinning stand (21% in 2013 and 20% in 2014), but was increased in heavy-thinning stand (49% in 2013 and 56% in 2014). In addition, the relationship between tree diameter and relative growth rate showed opposite trends between heavy thinning and light thinning stands. These results indicate that there are differences in biological reactions with thinning intensities.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85458", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85459" } }
{"authors":"Atinna Gunawan::Texas A & M University College Station--", "title":"NH51B-1887: Geomorphology and Mapping of Canyon Lake Gorge from Flood Events", "abstract":"A large volume of runoff causes flood that exceed the capacity of flood control reservoir. Canyon Lake Gorge, Canyon Lake, TX was formed as a result of a major erosional event in 2002. A low-pressure system combined with a flow of tropical air hit over central Texas causing precipitation, recent flooding in 2015 has changed the structure of the channel. Here, channel changes in the canyon are evaluated using hydrologic conductivity, ground penetrating radar (GPR), and photogrammetry. Mapping and field reconnaissance will be used to map out changes over the years of when the flood had occurred in the past (1998, 2002, and 2015) as well as to study the flood surrounding Canyon Lake Gorge and Guadalupe River. A demographic survey will be used to analyzed the damage that was caused by the flood and compare the severity of the event. The justification for this is that the Canyon Lake Gorge have a unique formation, geologic time scale before and after the flood has changed. The recent flood in 2015 gives an opportunity to study the changes that is currently occurring.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85459", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85460" } }
{"authors":"Mingjing Yu::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Bruce Rhoads::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Alison Anders::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Andrew Stumpf::Illinois State Geological Survey--", "title":"EP21C-0912: Tracing suspended sediment sources in the Upper Sangamon River Basin using conservative and non-conservative tracers", "abstract":"As the awareness of water pollution, eutrophication and other water related environmental concerns grows, the significance of sediment in the transport of nutrients and contaminants from agricultural areas to streams has received increasing attention. Both the physical and geochemical properties of suspended sediment are strongly controlled by sediment sources. Thus, tracing sources of suspended sediment in watersheds is important for the design of management practices to reduce sediment loads and contributions of sediment-adsorbed nutrients from agricultural areas to streams. However, the contributions of different sediment sources to suspended sediment loads within intensively managed watersheds in the Midwest still remain insufficiently explored. This study aims to assess the provenance of suspended sediment and the relation between channel morphology and production of suspended sediment in the Upper Sangamon River Basin, Illinois, USA. The 3,690-km2 Upper Sangamon River Basin is characterized by low-relief, agricultural lands dominated by row-crop agriculture. Sediment source samples were collected in the Saybrook from five potential sources: farmland, forests, floodplains, river banks, and grasslands. Event-based and accumulated suspended sediment samples were collected by ISCO automatic pump samplers and in situ suspended sediment samplers and from the stream at watershed outlet. A quantitative geochemical fingerprinting technique, combining statistically verified multicomponent signatures and an un-mixing model, was employed to estimate the relative contributions of sediment from five potential sources to the suspended sediment loads. Organic matter content, trace elements, and radionuclides from soil samples were used as potential tracers. Our preliminary results indicate that the majority of suspended sediment is derived from floodplains in the downstream portions of the watersheds, while only minor amounts of suspended sediment are derived from upland areas and banks. These results suggest that floodplain erosion during high flow events contributes to the suspended sediment.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85460", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85461" } }
{"authors":"Amanda Back::University of California Davis--Joseph Biello::University of California Davis--Andrew Majda::New York University--", "title":"OS51A-1973: The Potential Vorticity Budget of Multi-Scale MJO Models", "abstract":"Zhang and Ling (J. Atmos. Sci. 2012) performed a comprehensive analysis of the potential vorticity budget of the Madden-Julian Oscillation throughout its initiation and evolution. Biello and Majda have used the Intraseasonal Planetary Equatorial Synoptic-Scale Dynamics (IPESD) framework of Majda and Klein (J. Atmos. Sci. 2003) to create kinematic models of the MJO which distinguish MJO events forced by large-scale heating from MJO events forced by the upscale fluxes of momentum and temperature from the synoptic scales. In the present study, the results of Zhang and Ling provide a benchmark for comparing the different multi-scale MJO models. In particular, a potential vorticity budget can be obtained in the multiscale framework, and the advection, in-scale generation and upscale transfer of PV are considered.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85461", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85462" } }
{"authors":"William Dobbins::Self Employed--", "title":"OS13A-2032: OCEAN ACIDIFICATION: COCCOLITHOPHORE’S LIGHT CONTROLLED EFFECT ON ALKALINITY ", "abstract":"Coccolithophorids, which play a significant role in the flux of calcite and organic carbon from the photic region to deeper pelagic and benthic zones, are potentially far more useful than siliceous phytoplankton for ocean fertilization projects designed to sequester CO2. However, the production of H+ ions during calcification (HCO3 + Ca+ —> CaCO3 + H+) has resulted in localized acidification around coccolithophore blooms. It has been hypothesized that under the correct light conditions photosynthesis could proceed at a rate such that CO2 is removed in amounts equimolar or greater than the H+ produced by calcification, allowing stable or increasing alkalinity despite ongoing calcification. Previously, this effect had not been demonstrated under laboratory conditions. Fifteen Emiliania huxleyi cultures were separated into equal groups with each receiving: 0, 6, 12, 18, or 24 hours of light each day for 24 days. Daily pH, cell density, and temperature measurements revealed a strong positive correlation between light exposure and pH, and no significant decline in pH in any of the cultures. Alkalinity increases were temperature independent and not strongly correlated with cell density, implying photosynthetic removal of carbon dioxide as the root cause. The average pH across living cultures increased from 7.9 to 8.3 over the first week and changed little for the reminder of the 24-day period. The results demonstrate coccolithophorids can increase alkalinity across a broad range of cell densities, despite the acidification inherent to the calcification process. If the light-alkalinity effect reported here proves scalable to larger cultures, Emiliania huxleyi are a strong candidate for carbon sequestration via targeted ocean fertilization. ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85462", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85463" } }
{"authors":"Xinlei Sun::GIG Guangzhou Institute of Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Hongfeng Yang::Chinese University of Hong Kong--Lipeng He::GIG Guangzhou Institute of Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Shuang Wang::GIG Guangzhou Institute of Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences--", "title":"T51A-2867: Seismicity and Fault Zone Structure Near the Xinfengjiang Water Reservoir, Guangdong, China", "abstract":"Xingfengjiang Water Reservoir (XWR) was built in 1958 and the first impoundment was conducted in 1959. Immediately following the reservoir impoundment, a series of earthquakes occurred in the vicinity of the XWR, including the 1962 M6.1 earthquake that occurred ~1 km next to the dam. Numerous small earthquakes take place in this region presently, making it one of the most active seismic zones in Guangdong. To investigate the present seismicity and associated fault zone structure, we deployed a temporary seismic network, including a dense linear array across the Ren-Zi-Shi fault southwest to the reservoir. The temporary network is consisted of 42 stations that are operated in the field for more than one month. Because of the mountainous terrain, it is impossible to deploy broadband sensors. Here we use DDV-5 seismometer with a central frequency of 120Hz-5s that is independent on external GPS and battery. During our deployment, numerous earthquakes were recorded. Preliminary results of travel time analysis have shown the characteristic of low velocity fault zone. More detailed analysis, including relocation of earthquakes, ambient noise cross correlation, and modeling body waves, will be presented.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85463", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85464" } }
{"authors":"Jing Fan::Harvard University--David Weitz::Harvard University--", "title":"H21N-08: Targeted Delivery by Smart Capsules for Controlling Two-phase Flow in Porous Media", "abstract":"Understanding and controlling two-phase flow in porous media are of particular importance to the relevant industry applications, such as enhanced oil recovery, CO2 sequestration, and groundwater remediation. We develop a variety of smart microcapsules that can deliver and release specific substances to the target location in the porous medium, and therefore change the fluid property or medium geometry at certain locations. In this talk, I will present two types of smart capsules for (a) delivering surfactant to the vicinity of oil-water interface and (b) delivering microgels to the high permeability region and therefore blocking the pore space there, respectively. We also show that flooding these two capsules into porous media effectively reduces the trapped oil and improves the homogeneity of the medium, respectively. Besides of its industrial applications, this technique also opens a new window to study the mechanism of two-phase flow in porous media.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85464", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85465" } }
{"authors":"Michael Alonzo::University of California Santa Barbara--Jamon Van Den Hoek::Oregon State University--Nabil Ahmed::Goldsmiths University of London--", "title":"H51H-1490: Quantifying Forest and Coastal Disturbance from Industrial Mining Using Satellite Time Series Analysis Under Very Cloudy Conditions", "abstract":"The open-pit Grasberg mine, located in the highlands of Western Papua, Indonesia, and operated by PT Freeport Indonesia (PT-FI), is among the world’s largest in terms of copper and gold production. Over the last 27 years, PT-FI has used the Ajkwa River to transport an estimated 1.3 billion tons of tailings from the mine into the so-called Ajkwa Deposition Area (ADA). The ADA is the product of aggradation and lateral expansion of the Ajkwa River into the surrounding lowland rainforest and mangroves, which include species important to the livelihoods of indigenous Papuans. Mine tailings that do not settle in the ADA disperse into the Arafura Sea where they increase levels of suspended particulate matter (SPM) and associated concentrations of dissolved copper. Despite the mine’s large-scale operations, ecological impact of mine tailings deposition on the forest and estuarial ecosystems have received minimal formal study. While ground-based inquiries are nearly impossible due to access restrictions, assessment via satellite remote sensing is promising but hindered by extreme cloud cover. In this study, we characterize ridgeline-to-coast environmental impacts along the Ajkwa River, from the Grasberg mine to the Arafura Sea between 1987 and 2014. We use “all available” Landsat TM and ETM+ images collected over this time period to both track pixel-level vegetation disturbance and monitor changes in coastal SPM levels. Existing temporal segmentation algorithms are unable to assess both acute and protracted trajectories of vegetation change due to pervasive cloud cover. In response, we employ robust, piecewise linear regression on noisy vegetation index (NDVI) data in a manner that is relatively insensitive to atmospheric contamination. Using this disturbance detection technique we constructed land cover histories for every pixel, based on 199 image dates, to differentiate processes of vegetation decline, disturbance, and regrowth. Using annual reports from PT-FI, we show that the changing extent and spatial patterns of riparian vegetation disturbance directly correlate with yearly tailings production rates. While the rate of vegetation disturbance decreased after 1998, SPM levels along the Arafura coast increased, suggesting the failure of PT-FI to fully confine tailings to the ADA.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85465", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85466" } }
{"authors":"David Shean::Applied Physics Laboratory University of Washington--Ian Joughin::Applied Physics Laboratory University of Washington--Ben Smith::University of Washington--Etienne Berthier::CNRS - Legos--", "title":"C11D-04: Pine Island Glacier melt rates, grounding zone evolution, and dynamic response from 2008-2015", "abstract":"Significant grounding line retreat, acceleration, and thinning have occurred along the Amundsen Sea sector of West Antarctica in recent decades. These changes are directly linked to ice-ocean interaction beneath ice shelves, but existing observations of the spatial distribution, timing, and magnitude of ice shelf basal melt are very limited. We generated ~2 m/px DEMs for all available 2010-2015 high-resolution stereo satellite imagery (WorldView-1/2/3 and GeoEye-1) of the West Antarctic coast (excluding the Ross and Ronne-Filchner ice shelves). Annual and sub-annual DEM mosaics were produced for the Amundsen Sea sector, with focus on the Pine Island Glacier (PIG). We integrated SPIRIT ~40 m/px DEMs to extend the PIG time series to 2007/2008, and incorporated surface velocity maps from TerraSAR-X/TanDEM-X from 2009-2015. We use these products to compute ice thickness, Eulerian dH/dt, and Lagrangian DH/Dt, which capture evolving grounding line position, shelf thickening/thinning, and upstream ice dynamics. Ice shelf basal melt rate estimates are derived from both lagrangian DH/Dt and dense flux gate mass budget analysis. We document the spatial and temporal evolution of melt rates for the 2008-2015 period, and compare with existing ICESat (2003-2008) melt estimates and oceanographic observations. Finally, we compare observed melt vs. depth relationships with existing ice flow model parameterizations. Estimated basal melt rates are >100-150 m/yr within the PIG inner cavity, with significantly lower rates of <50 m/yr beneath the outer shelf. Eulerian dh/dt observations show significant thinning (>5-10 m/yr) upstream of the PIG grounding line following the ~2008-2009 ungrounding of the PIG “ice plain,” with additional thinning along lateral margins in subsequent years. A combination of reduced melt rates and increased flux resulted in ice shelf regrounding on a large transverse seabed ridge and significant ice shelf thickening. These new data provide critical observations that improve our understanding of ocean forcing, ice-ocean interaction, and resultant mass loss in the Amundsen Sea region.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85466", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85467" } }
{"authors":"Khan Overcast-Howe::University of Alaska Fairbanks--", "title":"SM31C-2509: Two-dimensional modeling of longitudinal modulations in the Io plasma torus", "abstract":"The longitudinal modulation in the Io plasma torus has been an open question for decades. A major clue to the cause of the torus modulation was provided by the discovery of the key modulation of the hot electron (i.e. ∼ 100s eV) population, at both the System III (magnetic rotation period) and System IV (∼ 3% longer than System III) period [Steffl et al., 2008]. However, very little progress has been made in explaining the origin of these hot electron modulations. Using a new two-dimensional (coupled radial and azimuthal dimensions) physical chemistry model for the plasma torus, we present sensitivity studies of torus properties (e.g., composition, density, and temperature) to: a) variations in System III and IV hot electron populations, b) specified radial profiles of subcorotation, and c) subcorotation determined by local mass loading rates and ionospheric Pedersen conductance. We also explore a possible feedback between hot electron production and local radial transport rates following the suggestion of Hess et al., [2011] regarding the origin of System IV hot electrons.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85467", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85468" } }
{"authors":"Christopher Jackson::Stanford University--Lauren Shumaker::Stanford University--Sam Johnstone::Stanford University--Stephan Graham::Stanford University--", "title":"ED41A-0832: Comparison of submarine gully morphologies in passive and active margin settings", "abstract":"Passive and active tectonic margins have inherently different hypsometry, due to local patterns of deformation and subsequent impacts on the style of sedimentation. One way we can analyze and compare the two settings is through observation of submarine gullies, which are small channel features that form along the continental slope as it descends to the ocean floor. By documenting the geometries of gullies that have formed on passive margins and gullies that have formed on active margins, we attempt to distinguish differences in gully morphologies in these two settings. We manually mapped over 600 gullies and interfluves from shaded relief and contour maps generated from bathymetric data across the globe, including the coast of California, the Beaufort Sea, and the Black Sea. We extrapolated and plotted elevation profiles of the gullies along their downslope distance, and compared a range of gully properties, such as length, spacing, and slope, to look at the correlations among those elements of gullies and their tectonic setting. We find that gullies forming on active margins show the greatest variability in their slopes, exhibiting both the steepest and the shallowest slopes of the dataset. The slopes of the passive margin gullies fall within the range of the active margin gully slopes, but interestingly, we note patterns in the ranges of gully steepness at different localities. These results differ from our our anticipation that active margin gullies are steeper than passive margin gullies, but suggest that gullies in all settings display a variety of morphologies. Additional mapping of active margin gullies will better determine if there are morphological differences between the two settings.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85468", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85469" } }
{"authors":"Yang Yang::university of Wisconsin-Madison--Mutlu Ozdogan::University of Wisconsin Madison--Alishir Kurban::Xinjiang Institute of Ecology and Geography, Chinese Academyof Sciences--Loheide II Steven::University of Wisconsin - Madison--Xi Chen::Xinjiang Institute of Ecology and Geography, Chinese Academyof Sciences--", "title":"H11I-1460: The Impact of Land Cover and Land Use Changes on the Hydrological Cycle of the Tarim Basin, NW China", "abstract":"The Tarim Basin, located in NW China, is the largest inland basin in the world. Since 1970s, the basin became modernized agriculturally through unprecedented reclamation which were controlled by the Chinese government to promote cotton production. In 2013, 40% of China’s cotton production is harvested in the Tarim Basin, representing 15% of world production. However, these large scale land use transformations lead to overuse of water resources in the upper and middle reaches for irrigation, with severe unintended ecological consequences in the lower reaches. The lower reaches of the Tarim River dried up gradually during the 1970s. In 2000, a water release project was launched to meet the ecological water demands of the river’s lower reaches. So far there have been 15 water releases with 1.7 billion USD invested. This work aims to improve our understanding of the impacts on the hydrologic cycle from land-use/land-cover change activities in the Tarim Basin by bridging boundaries between different disciplines and integrating them to portray all the key processes involved. This multidisciplinary approach includes analysis of remotely sensed imagery, application of a dynamic crop modelling framework, and simulation analyses with a transient, 2D, variably-saturated groundwater model. My primary findings show that in 2006, about 25820 km2 were identified as irrigated field. This is a 41% increase from 1970s, when the total irrigated area was only 18250 km2. The rapid expansions in irrigate fields, together with climate change, have affected the partitioning of water between the land surface and the lower atmosphere through changing evapotranspiration patterns. Approximately 7 km3 of water entered the atmosphere through crop evapotranspiration in 1971, but by 2006 this value had increased to nearly 11 km3. But changes in climatic conditions accounted for only 20% of the total increase in ET. In terms of ecological restoration, the study shows the current water releases project can maintain the current habit for Populus euphratica, but are not sufficient to expand habitat for Populus euphratica. This research addresses the hydrological and ecological implications of agricultural expansion and identifies sustainable strategies to reverse these negative environmental effects in the Tarim Basin.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85469", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85470" } }
{"authors":"Forrest DeGroff::Retired--", "title":"PA23B-2193: A Proposed Alternative Measure for Climate Change Potential", "abstract":"Background/Issue There currently exists no comprehensive metric to measure and value anthropogenic changes in carbon flux between geospheric carbon sinks. We propose that changes in carbon residence time within geospheres be used as a metric to assess anthropogenic changes in carbon flux, and the term ‘carbon quality’ (cq) be used to describe such changes. Carbon residence time represents the inverse of carbon flux; as carbon flux increases, the corresponding cq will decrease, and vice versa. Focusing on atmospheric carbon emissions as a measure of anthropogenic activity on the environment ignores the fungible characteristics of carbon that are crucial in both the biosphere and the worldwide economy. The ubiquitous carbon molecule enables the enormous diversity in the biosphere, as well as the widespread, strategic economic presence of carbon in the world economy. Focusing on a single form of inorganic carbon as a proxy metric for the plethora of anthropogenic activity and carbon compounds will prove inadequate, convoluted, and unmanageable. A broader, more basic metric is needed to capture the breath and scope of carbon activity. Results/Conclusions We propose a logarithmic vector scale for cq to measure anthropogenic carbon flux. The distance between vector points, e.g. the starting and ending residence times, would represent the change in cq. A base-10 logarithmic scale would allow the addition and subtraction of exponents to calculate changes in cq. As carbon moves between carbon reservoirs, the change in cq is measured as: cq = b ( log10 [mean carbon residence time] ) where b represents the carbon price coefficient for a particular country. For any country, cq measures the climate change potential for any organic carbon when converted to inorganic CO2, or to any lower residence time carbon state. The greater the carbon fees for a country, the larger the b coefficient would be, and the greater the import fees would be to achieve carbon parity on imports from countries with lower carbon fees. By assessing embodied carbon within imports for carbon parity with domestic production, cq would eliminate the incentives to use spatial shifts in carbon emissions to avoid carbon fees. Similarity, cq would temper the incentives to use temporal displacement of carbon emissions, such as with biomass or CCS, to reduce carbon fees.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85470", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85471" } }
{"authors":"Garrison Loope::University of Arizona--Jonathan Overpeck::University of Arizona--", "title":"PP43B-2264: The Spectrum of the Indian Summer Monsoon: a Proxy System Modeling Approach", "abstract":"Paleoclimate data often suggest that there is more hydroclimate variability in the multidecadal-century scales than is projected by climate models. This proxy-climate model mismatch could be caused by 1) a deficiency of climate models in capturing real long-period variability in the climate system or 2) biases in the proxy systems that amplify long-period variance. In this study we use proxy system models for oxygen isotopic systems (speleothem, ice core, tree-ring cellulose) to determine how much of the proxy-climate model mismatch is due to filtering of the climate signal by these proxies. We focus on the region impacted by the Indian summer monsoon and use output data from isotope-enabled climate models to drive our proxy system models. We find that much but not all of the proxy-climate model mismatch can be explained by biases in the proxy systems. Speleothem systems exhibit much stronger biases than tree-ring cellulose and ice cores due to significant reservoir times for water in karst. Even after using proxy system models to create pseudoproxies, the paleodata tend to have greater long-period variance (longer, more severe droughts and pluvials) than do the forward modeled pseudoproxies. However, access to long runs for isotope-enabled models from more modeling agencies is required before generalizations can be made about such model-proxy comparisons.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85471", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85472" } }
{"authors":"Satish Sankaran::Environmental Systems Research Institute--Dawn Wright::Environmental Systems Research Institute--", "title":"PA51D-08: A Pragmatic Approach to Sustainable Interoperability for the Web 2.0 World", "abstract":"In the geosciences, interoperability is a fundamental requirement. Members of various standards organizations such as the OGC and ISO-TC 211 have done yeomen services to promote a standards-centric approach to manage the interoperability challenges that organizations face today. The specific challenges that organizations face when adopting interoperability patterns are very many. One approach, that of mandating the use of specific standards has been reasonably successful. But scientific communities, as with all others, ultimately want their solutions to be widely accepted and used. And to this end there is a crying need to explore all possible interoperability patterns without restricting the choices to mandated standards. Standards are created by a slow and deliberative process that sometimes takes a long time to come to fruition and therefore sometime feel to fall short of user expectations. It seems therefore that organizations are left with a series of perceived orthogonal requirements when they want to pursue interoperability. They want a robust but agile solution, a mature approach that also needs to satisfy latest technology trends and so on. Sustainable interoperability patterns need to be forward looking and should choose the patterns and paradigms of the Web 2.0 generation. To this end, the key is to choose platform technologies that embrace multiple interoperability mechanisms that are built on fundamental ` open`  principles and which align with popular mainstream patterns. We seek to explore data-, metadata- and web service-related interoperability patterns through the prism of building solutions that encourage strong implementer and end-user engagement, improved usability and scalability considerations, and appealing developer frameworks that can grow the audience. The path to tread is not new, and the geocommunity only needs to observe and align its end goals with current Web 2.0 patterns to realize all the benefits that today we all take for granted as part of our everyday use of technology.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85472", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85473" } }
{"authors":"Benjamin Hardt::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--David McGee::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--Stephen Burns::University of Masachusetts--Nguyen Hieu::Vietnam National University--Do Trung Hieu::Vietnam National University--", "title":"PP31A-2207: Historical droughts in northern Vietnam captured by variability in speleothem δ18O", "abstract":"Speleothem records overlapping with the historical period offer valuable comparisons of documentary evidence with speleothem proxy data. These records provide opportunities to ‘ground-truth’ the paleo-record, fill in gaps in the historical record, and more confidently extent the paleo-record into deeper time. Here we present isotopic results from a stalagmite collected in northern Vietnam spanning 1200 to 1950 CE, a period with a rich historical record in Vietnam. This sample adds significantly to the relatively sparse paleoclimate record from Southeast Asia. The record includes several multi-decadal positive excursions of ≥1 per mille in calcite δ18O. A preliminary age model, based on six U/Th ages, suggests possible correspondence to noted droughts from the historical record, including the Angkor Droughts, the Ming Dynasty Drought, the Strange Parallels Drought, and the Victorian Holocaust Drought. As modeling studies indicate a strong correlation between rainfall δ18O and both the intensity of summer monsoon winds and summer rainfall over northern Vietnam (e.g., Liu et al., 2014), these excursions are consistent with a decrease in regional precipitation. The Vietnam record shows an overall negative trend during the Little Ice Age. The study site is located well south of the westerly wind belt, ruling out a shift between monsoonal and mid-latitude circulation systems as a likely explanation for the northern Vietnam record. We explore the correspondence between our record and other proxy data from Southeast Asia and suggest possible implications of the differences between Vietnamese and Chinese speleothem records during the Little Ice Age. References cited: Liu Z., Wen X., Brady E. C., Otto-Bliesner B., Yu G., Lu H., Cheng H., Wang Y., Zheng W., Ding Y., Edwards R. L., Cheng J., Liu W. and Yang H. (2014) Chinese cave records and the East Asia Summer Monsoon. Quaternary Science Reviews 83, 115–128.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85473", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85474" } }
{"authors":"Terry Rolfe::Portland State University--Andrew Rice::Portland State University--Jonathan Radda::Southern Oregon University--", "title":"B11B-0429: Measurements of N2O and SF6 mole fraction between 1977 and 1998 in archived air samples from Cape Meares, Oregon", "abstract":"The quantification of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere is important for monitoring imbalances in their global budgets between sources and sinks and their changes in time. Nitrous oxide (N2O) is a strong radiative trace gas with a GWP of ~300 times CO2 over a 100 year period and an atmospheric lifetime of ~100 years. The preindustrial revolution background concentration of N2O was ~270 ppb. Today, the concentration is ~330 ppb. Sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) is another potent greenhouse gas with a long lifetime (800 to 3200 years) and very large GWP (~23000 times CO2 over a 100 year period). Its current atmospheric concentration is low (~8 ppt today). Direct measurements of N2O and SF6 in air prior to the mid-1990s are few. Over 200 archived atmospheric gas samples collected at Cape Meares, Oregon between 1977 and 1998 were analyzed for their N2O and SF6 concentrations using an Agilent (model 6890 N) gas chromatograph fitted with an electron capture detector using a two column “heart-cut” technique. Precision of measurement of N2O and SF6 is calculated at 0.13% (1σ) and 1.35% (1σ) respectively. N2O concentrations in the late 1970s and early 1980s average around 303 ppb, rising to 309 ppb in the early 1990s. Between 1980 and 1990, the increase in N2O concentrations is found to be ~0.5 ppb/yr. SF6 concentrations during the late 1970s and early 1980s average around 0.9 ppt and rise slowly, reaching 1.6 ppt in the 1990s. We find that the increase in SF6 between 1980 and 1990 to be ~0.07 ppt/yr. We also discuss sample integrity in storage and observed temporal trends of N2O and SF6.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85474", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85475" } }
{"authors":"Jonathan Ajo Franklin::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Nate Lindsey::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Eileen Martin::Stanford University--Anna Wagner::Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory Alaska--Michelle Robertson::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Kevin Bjella::U.S. Army Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory Alaska--Arthur Gelvin::U.S. Army Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory Alaska--Craig Ulrich::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Yuxin Wu::Lawrence Berkeley National Lab--Barry Freifeld::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Thomas Daley::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Shan Dou::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"S41A-2707: Ambient Noise Surface Wave Tomography for Geotechnical Monitoring Using “Large N” Distributed Acoustic Sensing", "abstract":"Surface wave tomography using ambient noise sources has found broad application at the regional scale but has not been adopted fully for geotechnical applications despite the abundance of noise sources in this context. The recent development of Distributed Acoustic Sensing (DAS) provides a clear path for inexpensively recording high spatial resolution (< 1m sampling) surface wave data in the context of infrastructure monitoring over significant spatial domains (10s of km). Infrastructure monitoring is particularly crucial in the context of high-latitude installations where a changing global climate can trigger reductions in soil strength due to permafrost thaw. DAS surface wave monitoring systems, particularly those installed in/near transport corridors and coupled to ambient noise inversion algorithms, could be a critical “early warning” system to detect zones of decreased shear strength before failure. We present preliminary ambient noise tomography results from a 1.3 km continuously recording subsurface DAS array used to record traffic noise next to an active road in Fairbanks, AK. The array, depolyed at the Farmer's Loop Permafrost Test Station, was designed as a narrow 2D array and installed via trenching at ~30 cm. We develop a pre-processing and QC approach to analyze the large resulting volume of data, equivalent to a 1300 geophone array sampled at 1 khz. We utilize automated dispersion analysis and a quasi-2D MC inversion to generate a shear wave velocity profile underneath the road in a region of discontinuous permafrost. The results are validated against a high-resolution ERT survey as well as direct-push data on ice content. We also compare vintages of ambient noise DAS data to evaluate the short-term repeatability of the technique in the face of changing noise environments. The resulting dataset demonstrates the utility of using DAS for real-time shear-modulus monitoring in support of critical infrastructure.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85475", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85476" } }
{"authors":"Aiman Soliman::National Center for Super Computing Applications--Kiumars Soltani::National Center for Super Computing Applications--Junjun Yin::National Center for Super Computing Applications--Balaji Subramaniam::Argonne National Laboratory--Yan Liu::National Center for Super Computing Applications--Anand Padmanabhan::National Center for Super Computing Applications--Pierre Riteau::Argonne National Laboratory--Kate Keahey::Argonne National Laboratory--Shao-Wen Wang::National Center for Super Computing Applications--", "title":"IN52A-03: A Cloud Computing Workflow for Scalable Integration of Remote Sensing and Social Media Data in Urban Studies", "abstract":"Urban ecosystems are unique earth environments because both their physical and social components contribute to the overall dynamics of the system. Up-to-date, remote sensing data (e.g. optical and LiDAR) allowed researchers to monitor the development of impervious surfaces however, it was not adequate to detect associated social dynamics. Geo-located social media (e.g. Twitter) provides a data source to detect population dynamics and understand the interaction of people with their physical environment. Although, integrating social media with remote sensing data has been hindered by large volumes of data and the lack of models for integrating remote sensing products with unstructured social media data. In this research work, we leveraged the NSF chameleon cloud computing platform to provide virtual clusters and elastic auto-scaling of resources that are needed for the synthesis of landuse and geo-located Twitter data. In this context, data synthesis was used to address research questions related to population dynamics in major metropolitan areas. We provide an overview of a cloud computing workflow comprised of a set of coupled scalable synthesis modules for: a) preprocessing data, which includes storage and query of heterogeneous data streams, b) spatial data integration, which matches geo-located Twitter data with user defined landuse maps based on a conceptual model of human mobility and c) visualization of urban mobility patterns. Our results demonstrate the flexibility to connect data, synthesis methods and computing resources using cloud computing, which would be otherwise very difficult for untrained scientists to setup and control. Furthermore, we demonstrate the capabilities of CyberGIS-based workflow using the case study of comparing commuting distances across major US cities from 2013 through the present. We demonstrate how our workflow will support discoveries in urban ecological studies as well as linking human and physical dimensions in environmental research.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85476", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85477" } }
{"authors":"Craig Ferguson::University at Albany State University of New York--Min-Hee Lee::Seoul National University--", "title":"A11R-08: The statistical inhomogeneity of surface air temperature in global atmospheric reanalyses", "abstract":"Recently, a new generation of so-called climate reanalyses has emerged, including the 161-year NOAA—Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences (NOAA-CIRES) Twentieth Century Reanalysis Version 2c (20CR V2c), the 111-year ECMWF pilot reanalysis of the twentieth century (ERA-20C), and the 55-year JMA conventional reanalysis (JRA-55C). These reanalyses were explicitly designed to achieve improved homogeneity through assimilation of a fixed subset of (mostly surface) observations. We apply structural breakpoint analysis to evaluate inhomogeneity of the surface air temperature in these reanalyses (1851-2011). For the modern satellite era (1979-2013), we intercompare their inhomogeneity to that of all eleven available satellite reanalyses. Where possible, we distinguish between breakpoints that are likely linked to climate variability and those that are likely due to an artificial observational network shift. ERA-20C is found to be the most homogenous reanalysis, with 40% fewer artificial breaks than 20CR V2c. Despite its gains in homogeneity, continued improvements to ERA-20C are needed. In this presentation, we highlight the most spatially extensive artificial break events in ERA-20C.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85477", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85478" } }
{"authors":"Nicole Moore::Oregon State University--Kari Lytle::Oregon State University--Wendy Bohrson::Central Washington University--Anita Grunder::Oregon State University--", "title":"V41C-3090: New Petrologic and Geochemical Insights into Differentiation Processes Required to Produce the Lower Steens Basalt, Columbia River Basalt Province, SE Oregon", "abstract":"The Steens Basalt (~16.7 Ma) of SE Oregon is the oldest member and contains the most mafic compositions of the Columbia River Flood Basalt (CRB) event. The lower Steens lavas are more mafic and incompatible element poor than upper Steens flows, which are less magnesian, mildly alkalic, richer in incompatible elements, and mainly basaltic andesites, much like the CRB proper. At Steens Mountain, the lower Steens are thickest and comprise 35-40 mainly compound flows with modest soil development between, suggesting a period of slower effusion rate transitioning to high effusion rates as represented by stratigraphically higher flows that make up the prominent cliffs of the range. Stronger soil development between the uppermost flows implies a waning effusion rate. Whole rock major element data define two distinct trends in the lower Steens; the first has increasing Al2O3 with decreasing MgO at relatively low FeO, whereas the second exhibits increasing Al2O3 with decreasing MgO until an inflection point (~8 wt.% MgO), at which both Al2O3 and MgO decrease. Plagioclase mode is not coupled with Al2O3. MELTS closed system fractionation models across a range of pressures cannot reproduce these trends, suggesting open-system processes were at work. Olivine is homogeneous in some flows (~Fo80-78), but heterogeneous in others (~Fo84-62). Fo range does not correlate with whole rock MgO; two different flows with >10 wt.% MgO have Fo85-70 and Fo84-82. Plagioclase composition is restricted within and between flows (~An75-60). All these data suggest lower Steens magmas underwent large amounts of crystal fractionation and recharge with modest assimilation. Some assimilation requires an aluminous contaminant other than simple plagioclase accumulation. During other periods, magma mixing must have been efficient. Magma Chamber Simulator modeling will provide quantitative estimates for the roles of fractionation, recharge and assimilation in the lower Steens magma system.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85478", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85479" } }
{"authors":"Negin Sobhani::University of Iowa--Sarika Kulkarni::University of Iowa--CGRER--Gregory Carmichael::University of Iowa--", "title":"C13A-0791: Modeling of light absorbing particles in atmosphere, snow and ice in the Arctic", "abstract":"Long-range transport of atmospheric particles from mid-latitude sources to the Arctic is the main contributor to the Arctic aerosol loadings and deposition. Black Carbon (BC), Brown Carbon (BrC) and dust are considered of great climatic importance and are the main absorbers of sunlight in the atmosphere. Furthermore, wet and dry deposition of light absorbing particles (LAPs) on snow and ice cause reduction of snow and ice albedo. LAPs have significant radiative forcing and effect on snow albedo. There are high uncertainties in estimating radiative forcing of LAPs. We studied the potential effect of LAPs from different emission source regions and sectors on snow albedo in the Arctic. The transport pathway of LAPs to the Arctic is studies for different high pollution episodes. In this study a modeling framework including Weather Research and Forecasting Model (WRF) and the University of Iowa's Sulfur Transport and dEpostion model(STEM) is used to predict the transport of LAPs from different geographical sources and sectors (i.e. transportation, residential, industry, biomass burning and power) to the Arctic. For assessing the effect of LAP deposition on snow single-layer simulator of the SNow, Ice, and Aerosol Radiation (SNICAR-Online) model was used to derive snow albedo values for snow albedo reduction causes by BC deposition. To evaluate the simulated values we compared the BC concentration in snow with observed values from previous studies including Doherty et al. 2010. ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85479", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85480" } }
{"authors":"Jiwon Choi::Kyung Hee University--Dong-Hun Lee::Kyung Hee University--", "title":"SM21A-2462: Time evolution of ULF waves driven by impulsive particle injection", "abstract":"Poloidal Alfven waves with high azimuthal wave number (m >> 1) are of great interest since they are capable of interacting with high-energy (ring current) particles via bounce-drift resonance. However, the behavior of these transient poloidal waves that are driven by wave-particle interaction has not been studied well. In this presentation, we have conducted three-dimensional MHD simulations in dipole geometry to investigate the time-dependent behavior of the local wave fields at various locations. We examine how the time evolution of the wave modes varies when local sources are assumed with different widths. Here, a localized impulsive wave source represents a particle injection in a limited region, and thus its width can be indicative of differential azimuthal states. Our results show that the poloidal mode remains for a longer period of time when the perturbation is imposed in a narrower region in local time, which is consistent with previous studies that the poloidal mode with higher m has longer lifetime than lower m. We also present the effect of the prolonged interaction during which the waves are excited by particles on lifetime of the poloidal mode. It is suggested that the temporal variation of the observed transient poloidal mode waves can imply how they interact with the high-energy particles.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85480", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85481" } }
{"authors":"Kim Nielsen::Utah Valley University--Michael Schultz::Utah Valley University--Brittany Williams::Utah Valley University--Johnathon Gay::Utah Valley University--Stuart Johnson::Utah Valley University--Patrick Dunn::Utah Valley University--", "title":"ED34B-08: Utah Valley University Field Station at Capitol Reef National Park: A Venue for Improved Student Learning and Retention", "abstract":"The unique geo-environment offered in Capitol Reef National Park and its surrounding areas has a long-standing history of inspiring geological scientific exploration. The Capitol Reef Field Station was established in 2008 as part of collaboration between the National Park and Utah Valley University in order to support teaching and research of the natural environment found within the park and on the Colorado Plateau. The facility itself situated deep within the park, well off any public road system offers state of the art alternative energy and sustainable construction and makes extensive use of passive heating and cooling, in order to maintain its status of being “off-grid.” The field station is a 6200 square foot complex of classrooms and dormitories supporting university level education and field studies of the Colorado Plateau. The complex includes a classroom and dining area, professional kitchen, and two separate dormitories, which can sleep up to 24 overnight visitors, while the daytime usage can accommodate up to 40 visitors. The vision of the facility is to support teaching and research toward responsible, respectful, and sustainable stewardship of the natural world – including Interdisciplinary learning between arts and sciences Student internships and service learning in collaboration with the National Park Service Field-based scientific research (as well as inventorying and assessing Park ecosystems changes) Field training in scientific research Collaboration between National Park Service scientists and local, regional, and national institutions The park is situated at 38°N 249°E at elevations greater than 2000 m in Southern Utah. In contrast to the more famous neighboring sister parks such as Zion and Bryce Canyon National Parks, which are in relatively close proximity to large road systems and cities, Capitol Reef offers what is believed to be the darkest night sky in the US. The culmination of features creates an ideal location for studies of the faint upper atmospheric airglow emissions. This presentation details the upper atmospheric undergraduate educational program at UVU, and will also include a section regarding the newly established interdisciplinary air pollution educational program, and how communities outside of UVU can use the facility.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85481", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85482" } }
{"authors":"Ray Chuang::Indiana University Bloomington--Junichi Fukuda::University of Tokyo--Kuo-En Ching::NCKU National Cheng Kung University--", "title":"T53A-08: Imaging spatiotemporal evolution of postseismic deformation of the 2003 M6.8 Chengkung earthquake", "abstract":"Large earthquakes are usually accompanied by rapid afterslip postseismic deformation. It is important to understand how much slip occurs and how slip migrates after the earthquakes. M6.8 Chengkung earthquake is one of largest earthquakes in Taiwan in recent years. Previous studies estimate accumulative afterslip distribution from 3 to 6 months after the main shock. However, the inferred slip distributions are inconsistent. Here we analyze the postseismic slip evolution of the Chengkung earthquake by using time series from about 40 stations. The GPS data are from the Taiwan GPS website service of the Taiwan earthquake research center. We first fit secular velocity, antenna changes, coseismic displacements, and a presumed logarithmical pattern to each GPS time series by using a MCMC metropolis algorithm. Then we remove secular velocity and instantaneous signal offsets from the time series. In addition, we construct 3D fault geometry based on relocated ambient seismicity and regional tomography. We use a modified Network Inverse Filter to estimate spatiotemporal slip migration directly from GPS time series. This method can allow temporal smoothing parameter changes and simultaneously solve for slip and common model errors. With this method, we can imagine spatiotemporal slip evolution of afterslip postseismic deformation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85482", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85483" } }
{"authors":"Alison Appling::University of Wisconsin Madison U.S. Geological Survey Center for Integrated Data Analytics--Jordan Read::USGS Wisconsin Water Science Center--Robert Hall::University of Wyoming--Edward Stets::National Research Program Boulder--Emily Stanley::Univ Wisconsin--Emily Bernhardt::Duke University--James Heffernan::Florida International Univ.--Maite Arroita::University of the Basque Country--Natalie Griffiths::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Jud Harvey::USGS Central Region Offices Denver--David Lorenz::USGS Minnesota Water Science Center--Luke Winslow::U.S. Geological Survey--Charles Yackulic::USGS Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center--", "title":"B51F-0489: Synchrony and Divergence in Stream Metabolism across the Continental United States", "abstract":"River and stream ecosystems experience highly variable inputs of water, nutrients, organic matter, heat, and light over the scales of hours to storms to seasons. Despite the unstable physical and chemical environments of such ecosystems, benthic and pelagic communities persist and even thrive. Whole-stream metabolism estimates allow us to quantify the overall activity of these diverse and responsive communities. They also provide a holistic way to assess how the temporal patterns of that activity are structured by streams’ dynamic hydrology and resource availability. We synthesized continental-scale datasets of high-frequency dissolved oxygen, discharge, water temperature, and light to estimate metabolism in over 200 streams to answer the question, “What are the drivers of synchrony and divergence in the temporal patterns of metabolism among streams of North America?” We find that short-term disturbances in the form of storms and cloudy days have strong proximate, dampening effects on whole-ecosystem metabolism; however, despite these strong proximate effects, streams with similar resource and discharge regimes are largely synchronous in their overall seasonal patterns. The median date of peak gross primary productivity is close to the summer solstice in June, while ecosystem respiration has two most-common annual peaks, one in early spring and another in mid fall. These differences in peak timing point to systematic differences at the continental scale in the timing of light versus organic matter availability, with consequent seasonality in net ecosystem productivity.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85483", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85484" } }
{"authors":"Sooyeon Yi::University of California Davis--Samuel Sandoval Solis::University of California Davis--", "title":"H41G-1461: Hydrological WEAP Modeling of the Upper Basin of the Apurimac River Basin, in Peru. An Assessment of Available Water Resources and Supply", "abstract":"Designing sustainable water resources systems is challenging given the natural scarcity of this resources in certain region and the increasing anthropogenic water demand for economic purposes. The overall goal of this study is to develop an empirical hydrologic model (one bucket model) that can adequately represent the hydrology and water resources management in the Apurimac River Basin (ARB) in Peru. The specific objectives are to: (a) develop the empirical hydrologic model, calibrate and validate it (b) build a water allocation model (c) evaluate their water supply performance with different series of scenarios (i) current and future water demands, (ii) with and without the construction of the reservoir under different hydrologic conditions (normal, dry and wet). Water Evaluation And Planning (WEAP) was used to build the model and evaluate different water allocation strategies, new infrastructure, and assess current and future water needs based on the requirement of the Regional Government of Cuzco and Arequipa. The proposed hydrologic model is a one-bucket model, where the processes of direct runoff, interflow and baseflow are represented and the process of groundwater recharge is the vertical outflow from the bottom of the bucket. Also, this model includes groundwater component which is an imperative process to consider in the valley of this basin because it provides adequate results, as shown later for this basin. Water allocation model estimate the quantity of water available to different demand sites within a river basin at different times. This study explains their impact in the analysis of the water availability and water supply for current and future water demands in the ARB with and without reservoir.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85484", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85485" } }
{"authors":"James Cowlyn::University of Canterbury--Josef Dufek::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--Ben Kennedy::University of Canterbury--Julian McAdams::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--", "title":"V31F-04: Pyroclastic density current dynamics and associated hazards at ice-covered volcanoes", "abstract":"Understanding the processes by which pyroclastic density currents (PDCs) are emplaced is crucial for volcanic hazard prediction and assessment. Snow and ice can facilitate PDC generation by lowering the coefficient of friction and by causing secondary hydrovolcanic explosions, promoting remobilisation of proximally deposited material. Where PDCs travel over snow or ice, the reduction in surface roughness and addition of steam and meltwater signficantly changes the flow dynamics, affecting PDC velocities and runout distances. Additionally, meltwater generated during transit and after the flow has come to rest presents an immediate secondary lahar hazard that can impact areas many tens of kilometers beyond the intial PDC. This, together with the fact that deposits emplaced on ice are rarely preserved means that PDCs over ice have been little studied despite the prevalence of summit ice at many tall stratovolcanoes. At Ruapehu volcano in the North Island of New Zealand, a monolithologic welded PDC deposit with unusually rounded clasts provides textural evidence for having been transported over glacial ice. Here, we present the results of high-resolution multiphase numerical PDC modeling coupled with experimentaly determined rates of water and steam production for the Ruapehu deposits in order to assess the effect of ice on the Ruapehu PDC. The results suggest that the presence of ice significantly modified the PDC dynamics, with implications for assessing the PDC and associated lahar hazards at Ruapehu and other glaciated volcanoes worldwide.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85485", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85486" } }
{"authors":"Joel Venzke::Drake University--Valentine Anantharaj::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Eric Lingerfelt::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Bronson Messer::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--", "title":"IN31A-1751: Just-in-time Time Data Analytics and Visualization of Climate Simulations using the Bellerophon Framework", "abstract":"Climate model simulations are used to understand the evolution and variability of earth’s climate. Unfortunately, high-resolution multi-decadal climate simulations can take days to weeks to complete. Typically, the simulation results are not analyzed until the model runs have ended. During the course of the simulation, the output may be processed periodically to ensure that the model is preforming as expected. However, most of the data analytics and visualization are not performed until the simulation is finished. The lengthy time period needed for the completion of the simulation constrains the productivity of climate scientists. Our implementation of near real-time data visualization analytics capabilities allows scientists to monitor the progress of their simulations while the model is running. Our analytics software executes concurrently in a co-scheduling mode, monitoring data production. When new data are generated by the simulation, a co-scheduled data analytics job is submitted to render visualization artifacts of the latest results. These visualization output are automatically transferred to Bellerophon’s data server located at ORNL’s Compute and Data Environment for Science (CADES) where they are processed and archived into Bellerophon’s database. During the course of the experiment, climate scientists can then use Bellerophon’s graphical user interface to view animated plots and their associated metadata. The quick turnaround from the start of the simulation until the data are analyzed permits research decisions and projections to be made days or sometimes even weeks sooner than otherwise possible! The supercomputer resources used to run the simulation are unaffected by co-scheduling the data visualization jobs, so the model runs continuously while the data are visualized. Our just-in-time data visualization software looks to increase climate scientists’ productivity as climate modeling moves into exascale era of computing.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85486", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85487" } }
{"authors":"Heon-Sook KIM::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Shamil Maksyutov::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Dmitry Belikov::NIPR National Institute of Polar Research--Akihiko Ito::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Isamu Morino::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Yukio Yoshida::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Tatsuya Yokota::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Motoki Sasakawa::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Toshinobu Machida::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--", "title":"A33C-0175: Inverse modeling analysis of regional methane fluxes using GOSAT retrievals in 2010-2012", "abstract":"Our inverse modeling system estimated monthly regional CH4 fluxes during the period 2010-2012, based on ground-based observations and GOSAT retrievals (called Inv.GG). With adding GOSAT retrievals to the flux estimation, we found enhanced fluxes in tropical Africa (17% from a priori and 10% from flux estimates using ground-based observations only, called Inv.GB), tropical and subtropical South America (12% and 9% respectively), and East Asia (21% and 6% respectively), but lowered fluxes in South and Southeast Asia (12% and 14% respectively). Overall, a larger year-to-year variation of estimated fluxes was found in Inv.GG. In 2010, raging fires occurred in Brazil and Bolivia under severe drought, and the highest biomass burning fluxes in central part of South America were estimated in 2010 during the simulation period 2010-2012. The intensity of the 2010 biomass burning flux was enhanced in Inv.GG compared with a priori of GFED v3.1 and Inv.GB. In Russia, two fire events occurred in 2010 and 2012 under very hot and relatively dry condition. The 2010 fires occurred over European Russia, and a large departure from the GFED estimates was not shown in both Inv.GB and Inv.GG. For the 2012 fires in eastern and central Russia, the severity was explained by the 2012 highest biomass burning fluxes over Siberia during the simulation period 2010-2012. The biomass burning fluxes in Inv.GG were similar to a priori, but lower than Inv.GB (particularly in the eastern part of Siberia). In Inv.GG, the Jun-Aug biomass burning fluxes account for ~14% of the annual mean Siberian total flux in 2010-2012.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85487", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85488" } }
{"authors":"Francois Hamon::Stanford University--Bradley Mallison::Chevron Corporation San Ramon--Hamdi Tchelepi::Stanford Earth Sciences--", "title":"H21E-1418: Hybrid Upwind Discretization for the Implicit Simulation of Three-Phase Coupled Flow and Transport with Gravity", "abstract":"The systems of algebraic equations arising from implicit (backward-Euler) finite-volume discretization of the conservation laws governing multiphase flow in porous media are quite challenging for nonlinear solvers. In the presence of counter-current flow due to buoyancy, the coupling between flow (pressure) and transport (saturations) is often the cause of nonlinear problems when single-point Phase-Potential Upwinding (PPU) is used. To overcome such convergence problems in practice, the time step is reduced and Newton’s method is restarted from the solution at the previous converged time step. Here, we generalize the work of Lee, Efendiev and Tchelepi [Advances in Water Resources, 2015] to propose an Implicit Hybrid Upwinding (IHU) scheme for coupled flow and transport. In the pure transport problem, we show that the numerical flux obtained with IHU is differentiable, monotone and consistent for two and three-phase flow. For coupled flow and transport, we prove saturation physical bounds as well as the existence of a solution to our scheme. Challenging two- and three-phase heterogeneous multi-dimensional numerical tests confirm that the new scheme is non-oscillatory and convergent, and illustrate the superior convergence rate of our IHU-based Newton solver for large time steps.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85488", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85489" } }
{"authors":"Jonathan Overpeck::University of Arizona--Toby Ault::Cornell University, Department of Earth and Atmospheric Science--Julia Cole::University of Arizona--John Fasullo::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Garrison Loope::University of Arizona--Luke Parsons::University of Arizona--Samantha Stevenson::National Center for Atmospheric Research--", "title":"GC52B-01: Potential Bias in Projecting Future Regional Megadrought Risk: Insights From A Global Data-Model Framework", "abstract":"Megadrought is one of the most significant and costly climate extremes, and one that stakeholders (e.g., water and other resource managers) the world over wish to understand better; in particular, they need estimates of the risk of severe droughts as a function of drought frequency, severity, duration, and atmospheric greenhouse gas concentration. In many dry-climate regions of the globe, megadrought is synonymous with multi-decadal drought. However, in other regions, megadrought can be defined as extended drought, mostly not seen in the period of instrumental observations, and that would have large impacts if it were to occur in the future. New and published paleoclimatic observations allow us to understand the spectrum of drought in many regions of the globe; droughts exceeding 50 years have occurred in recent Earth history in southwestern North America, sub-Saharan Africa, the Mediterranean and Australia, whereas shorter megadroughts have occurred in Monsoon Asia, Amazonia and elsewhere. Data-model comparisons for regions with sufficiently long (e.g., 1000-2000 years) records of observed hydroclimatic variability suggest that state-of-the-art models can provide realistic estimates of interannual to decadal drought risk, but underestimate the risk of megadrought. Likely reasons for this shortcoming are the lack of sufficient multi-decadal variability in simulations of the past and future, plus an underappreciated understanding about how temperature variability and land-surface feedbacks interact with hydrological and ecological drought, as well as the roles played by unusually wet hydroclimatic extremes (e.g., ENSO related) in ending droughts of long duration. Paleoclimatic records also provide the opportunity to estimate how much models underestimate megadrought risk as a function of locale, frequency, severity, duration, and atmospheric greenhouse gas concentration; they also aid in providing stakeholders with bias-corrected estimates of megadrought risk.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85489", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85490" } }
{"authors":"Jorge Heraud::Pontificia Universidad Catolica del Peru--Victor Centa::Pontificia Universidad Catolica del Peru--Tom Bleier::QuakeFinder--", "title":"NH32B-03: Electromagnetic Precursors Leading to Triangulation of Future Earthquakes and Imaging of the Subduction Zone", "abstract":"During several sessions in past AGU meetings, reports on the progress of analysis of magnetometer data have been given, as our research moved from a one dimensional geometry, to two and finally to a three dimensional image. In the first case, we learned how to extract one coordinate, azimuth information, on the occurrence of an earthquake based on the processing of mono-polar pulses received at a single station. A two dimensional geometry was implemented through triangulation and we showed the use of this technique to find out where a future epicenter would occur. Recently, we have obtained compelling evidence that the pressure points leading to the determination of future epicenters originate at a plane, inclined with the same angle as the subduction zone, a three-dimensional position of the future hypocenter. Hence, an image of the subduction zone or interface between the Nazca plate and the continental plate in the northern area of Lima, Peru, has been obtained, corresponding to the subduction zone obtained by traditional seismic methods. Our work with magnetometers deployed along part of the Peruvian coast since 2009, has shown that it is possible to measure, with significant precision, the azimuth of electromagnetic pulses propagating from stress points in the earth’s crust due to the subduction of tectonic plates, as to be able to determine precisely the origin of the pulses. The occurrence of earthquakes approximately 11 to 18 days after the appearance of the first pulses and the recognition of grouping of such pulses, has allowed us to determine accurately the direction and the timing of future seismic events. Magnetometers, donated by Quakefinder and Telefonica del Peru were then strategically installed in different locations in Peru with the purpose of achieving triangulation. During two years since 2013, about a dozen earthquakes have been associated with future seismic activity in a pre or post occurrence way. Our presentation will be based on animated data in video form and as events occur day by day, depicting the formation of the future epicenter and the 3-D position of pressure points on the subduction zone, as a dozen earthquakes occur during 2013 and 2014 in Central Peru. Triangulation of pulses for EQs in 2013- 2014 Image of subduction zone from the same data points 20", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85490", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85491" } }
{"authors":"William Ball::Johns Hopkins University--Qian Zhang::Johns Hopkins University--Robert Hirsch::USGS Headquarters--", "title":"H32D-07: Effects of Reservoir Filling on Sediment and Nutrient Removal in the Lower Susquehanna River Reservoir: An Input-Output Analysis Based on Long-Term Monitoring", "abstract":"Reduction of suspended sediment (SS), total phosphorus (TP), and total nitrogen is an important focus for Chesapeake Bay watershed management. Susquehanna River, the bay’s largest tributary, has drawn attention because SS load from behind Conowingo Dam (near the river fall-line) has risen dramatically recently. To better understand these changes, we evaluated decadal-scale (1986-2013) history of concentrations and fluxes using data from sites above and below the reservoir. First, observed concentration-discharge relationships show declined SS and TP concentrations at the reservoir inlet under most discharges in recent years, but such changes have not been propagated to emerge at the outlet, implying recently diminished reservoir trapping. Second, best estimates of loadings show declined net depositions of SS and TP in recent decades, which occurred under a range of discharges, with the 75th~99.5th percentile of Conowingo discharge dominating such changes and carrying most sediment/nutrient loadings. Finally, stationary models that better accommodate effects of riverflow variability also show diminished reservoir trapping of SS and TP, which occurred under a range of flows including those well below the literature-documented scour threshold. These findings have significant implications in regard to our understanding and management of this major reservoir and illustrate the value of long-term monitoring programs.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85491", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85492" } }
{"authors":"Hook Hua::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Gerald Manipon::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Michael Starch::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Lan Dang::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Philip Southam::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Brian Wilson::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Charles Avis::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Albert Chang::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Cecilia Cheng::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Mike Smyth::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--James McDuffie::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Paul Ramirez::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"IN43B-1733: High-Resiliency and Auto-Scaling of Large-Scale Cloud Computing for OCO-2 L2 Full Physics Processing", "abstract":"Next generation science data systems are needed to address the incoming flood of data from new missions such as SWOT and NISAR where data volumes and data throughput rates are order of magnitude larger than present day missions. Additionally, traditional means of procuring hardware on-premise are already limited due to facilities capacity constraints for these new missions. Existing missions, such as OCO-2, may also require high turn-around time for processing different science scenarios where on-premise and even traditional HPC computing environments may not meet the high processing needs. We present our experiences on deploying a hybrid-cloud computing science data system (HySDS) for the OCO-2 Science Computing Facility to support large-scale processing of their Level-2 full physics data products. We will explore optimization approaches to getting best performance out of hybrid-cloud computing as well as common issues that will arise when dealing with large-scale computing. Novel approaches were utilized to do processing on Amazon’s spot market, which can potentially offer ~10X costs savings but with an unpredictable computing environment based on market forces. We will present how we enabled high-tolerance computing in order to achieve large-scale computing as well as operational cost savings.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85492", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85493" } }
{"authors":"Joanna Tycner::Adelphi University--Susan Ustin::University of California Davis--Shane Grigsby::University of Colorado at Boulder--", "title":"B51H-0532: Mapping Terpenes over the Teakettle Experimental Forest", "abstract":"Terpenes are a category of biogenic volatile organic compounds (BVOC) produced by many plants, most notably coniferous plants. Commonly, these terpenes are aromatic compounds. The intensity of terpene emission varies depending greatly on light and temperature. Through remote sensing data as well as ASD spectroradiometry data this study focuses on locating sources of terpene emissions in the Teakettle Experimental Forest. These emissions are of particular concern because of their influence on the chemical concentration of the lower troposphere, as well as being an indicator of tree health. A novel approach has been designed through this study in order to locate and further understand these terpene emissions. Terpenes such as camphene have been reported to have subtle spectral features located at around 1.7 μm. For the first time, a map of terpene sources has been constructed by accentuating this particular feature. A continuum interpolated band ratio (CIBR) was used in order to compute a relative abundance of terpenes from the AVIRIS data. The CIBR equation showed promise, as terpenes were most strongly concentrated in areas of coniferous vegetation (a primary source of terpenes) and were less prominent over bodies of water or industrialized areas. The greatest concentrations were focused over treetops and other woody vegetation. Although it is known that terpenes have weak absorption features in the SWIR, there is little information available regarding the mapping of terpene emissions. This project addresses a novel approach to observing biochemical components in the lower troposphere and could potentially give more information to explain the health of forest ecosystems.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85493", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85494" } }
{"authors":"Steven Marsh::University of the Fraser Valley--Sharon Gillies::University of the Fraser Valley--Bernhard Peucker-Ehrenbrink::WHOI--Alida Janmaat::University of the Fraser Valley--Audrey Faber::University of the Fraser Valley--Ellen Clemence::University of the Fraser Valley--Ashleigh Yakemchuk::University of the Fraser Valley--Marlena McCabe::University of the Fraser Valley--Alexandra Toner::University of the Fraser Valley--Harleen Dhaliwal::University of the Fraser Valley--Michael Gaultier::University of the Fraser Valley--Shyna Kanda::University of the Fraser Valley--Ryan Leffers::University of the Fraser Valley--Gaganjeet Mahil::University of the Fraser Valley--Dianne Paulson::University of the Fraser Valley--Karanjit Puri::University of the Fraser Valley--Jasmine Sekhton::University of the Fraser Valley--Baljot Sidhu::University of the Fraser Valley--Davinder Sidhu::University of the Fraser Valley--Shae Turner::University of the Fraser Valley--Alanna Strangway::University of the Fraser Valley--", "title":"ED11A-0853: Investigation into seasonal water chemistry variations in the Clayburn Creek watershed, British Columbia: An opportunity for authentic research experience for University of the Fraser Valley undergraduate students.", "abstract":"Faculty and students from the University of the Fraser Valley participate in the time series sampling of the Fraser River and Fraser River tributaries as part of the Global Rivers Observatory (GRO, www.globalrivers.org) which is coordinated by Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and Woods Hole Research Center. Clayburn and Willband Creeks in Abbotsford, British Columbia are part of this project and are being threatened by increasing anthropogenic activity (agricultural, industrial and residential development) within the watershed. Undergraduate students from the Geography and Biology departments have been instructed in the sampling protocols and the collection of thw water chemistry data. Each student that has been involved in this sampling project will gain a greater understanding of the seasonal variation of the water chemistry of the Clayburn watershed. Through this involvement in this portion of the Global Rivers Observatory our students become more aware of the threats to our streams and the methods utilized to monitor water chemistry.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85494", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85495" } }
{"authors":"Nicolas Bartschi::University of Houston--Joel Saylor::University of Houston--Thomas Lapen::University of Houston--Peter Copeland::University of Houston--Michael Blum::University of Kansas--", "title":"V53D-3152: Discriminating Sediment Supply Versus Accommodation Controls on Late Cretaceous Foreland Basin Stratigraphic Architecture in the Book Cliffs, Central Utah Using Double Dating", "abstract":"Middle to late Campanian strata of the Book Cliffs, Utah record the Late Cretaceous deposition of three clastic wedges in the North American Cordilleran foreland basin east of the Sevier thrust belt. Variations in wedge geometries provide an opportunity to evaluate the effects of sediment supply versus accommodation on foreland basin stratal architecture. There is an increase in eastward progradation rate between the Lower and Upper Castlegate Sandstone. However, the progradation rate decreases in the overlying Bluecastle and Price River formations, as well as the laterally equivalent Farrer and Tuscher formations. Rapid progradation during Upper Castlegate deposition may be caused by increased sediment supply from either rapid exhumation of the Sevier thrust belt or changes in the sediment source. Alternatively, reduced accommodation within the proximal foreland basin from uplifts associated with Laramide deformation, or a transition from flexural to dynamic subsidence, could produce the same observed rapid wedge progradation. We identify changes in sediment provenance and source-area exhumation rate using detrital zircon geochronology. Initial detrital zircon U-Pb data reveals a significant up-section and spatial shift in provenance between all wedge boundaries. Quantitative comparisons between new and previously published detrital zircon U-Pb provenance data indicates an overall up-section decrease in thrust-belt-sourced Mesozoic eolianite and North American passive-margin source areas coupled with an increase in southern magmatic arc and Mogollon Highland source. We observe an east-west diachroneity in the arrival of the southern-sourced sediment, but little to no variation from samples along a north-south transect. Initial results suggest the shift in sediment source is not consistent with an increased exhumation rate of the source area, although further work using thermochronology is required to better understand the exhumation rate.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85495", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85496" } }
{"authors":"Jennifer Burney::University of California San Diego--", "title":"A24E-06: Surface and Column Aerosol Impacts of the United States' Natural Gas Transition", "abstract":"This paper quantifies the air pollution and climate impacts of the natural gas transition over the past decade in the United States. We integrate satellite and ground measurements with chemical transport modeling to understand the impact of of the large-scale shift from coal to natural gas on the quantity and chemical composition of column aerosol and surface particulate matter. We leverage the natural experiment of individual units that changed technologies (a sharp discontinuity) as well as state-level changes from old plants being taken offline and new ones being brought online (a soft discontinuity) and connect technology changes to emissions changes to detected aerosol / particulate matter changes. We use this methodology to estimate the size of the ‘sulfate’ mask due to coal consumption in the United States and understand more fully the climate implications of energy technology changes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85496", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85497" } }
{"authors":"Neil Terry::Rutgers University--Lee Slater::Rutgers Univ--Xavier Comas::Florida Atlantic University--Kisa Mwakanyamale::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--William Wright::Florida Atlantic University--Zachary Freeburg::Florida Atlantic University--Barbara Goldman::Rutgers Univ--Adriana Morocho::Rutgers Univ--", "title":"NS41B-1949: Spatial Variability in Biogenic Gas Dynamics in Relation to Vegetation Cover in a Northern Peatland from Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR)", "abstract":"Ground penetrating radar (GPR) has been used for the last decade to investigate several aspects related to the distribution and release of biogenic gases (i.e. methane and carbon dioxide) in peat soils through well-established petrophysical relationships. We use this approach to investigate how differences in vegetation/land cover at three different field sites in Caribou Bog, Maine may alter such gas dynamics. The three study sites are characterized by: [1] a site amid standing pools of water with approximately 6 m of peat overlying an esker deposit, [2] a site dominated by low shrubs near the pools with peat down to 6.75 m, and [3] a site consisting of shrubs and trees with peat down to 6.4 m. A time-lapse series of GPR common offset (CO) and common midpoint (CMP) data were collected within hours of each other at all three sites using 100 MHz antennas during July 2013. In many cases, reciprocal data (transmitter and receiver positions switched) were also collected to gain insight on systematic errors. Water level variations and other environmental parameters were logged continuously at or near the sites, and limited gas sampling data were collected at sites [2] and [3]. Vertical 1D distributions of gas content with depth from each GPR dataset were estimated through CMP velocity analysis and application of a three component mixing model. These results were compared with CO data to observe changes in gas content along transects at each site. Preliminary results suggest site [1] (the pools site) has the highest overall gas content and exhibits the most variability in gas content through time. Despite several failed attempts to automate data acquisition in the field, manual acquisition still proves immensely valuable for quantitatively estimating spatiotemporal variability of gas content in a rapid and efficient manner in peatland ecosystems. In this case, the non-invasive monitoring of gas content variations demonstrates how free phase gas dynamics in peatlands varies with vegetation composition.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85497", "section":"Near Surface Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85499" } }
{"authors":"Terry Tang::Yale University--Noah Planavsky::Yale University--Jeremy Owens::Florida State University Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute--Gordon Love::University of California Riverside--Timothy Lyons::University of California-Riverside--Larry Peterson::University of Miami--", "title":"PP33E-07: Tracking Eukaryotic Production and Burial Through Time with Zinc Isotopes", "abstract":"Zinc is an important, often co-limiting nutrient for eukaryotes in the oceans today. Given the importance of Zn in the modern oceans, we developed a Zn isotope approach to track the extent of Zn limitation and eukaryotic production through Earth’s history. Specifically, we use the isotopic systematics of the pyrite (δ66Znpyr), rock extracts (bitumen) and kerogen pyrolysate (δ66Znorg) within euxinic black shales. We show that δ66Znpyr of euxinic core-top muds from the Cariaco basin capture the global deep seawater signature, validating its use as a seawater proxy. Additionally, we propose that Δ66Znpyr-org can be used to track surface water zinc bioavailability. Detailed studies of short-lived oceanic anoxic events such as Cretaceous OAE2, which punctuate an otherwise dominantly oxic Phanerozoic world, exhibit dramatic shifts in seawater δ66Zn and organic bound zinc. Such perturbations are consistent with the demise of eukaryotes under a nitrogen stressed regime, in which cyanobacteria carry the competitive advantage. Contradictory to previous models, however, our data suggest that zinc remained largely bioavailable throughout these anoxic intervals despite significant drawdown of the global reservoir. The framework developed from studies of the modern, Cenozoic, and Mesozoic can be used to track the Precambrian evolution of the marine Zn cycle and the rise of eukaryotic algae to ecological dominance.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85499", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85500" } }
{"authors":"Nicholas Van Buer::California State Polytechnic University Pomona--", "title":"V33E-04: The heat budgets of magmatic arcs: Discrepancies between heat flow measurements, volatile fluxes, and interpretations of the geologic record", "abstract":"Arc magmatic processes, from differentiation to emplacement, depend crucially on the rate at which heat and magma are supplied to the arc crust. In active arcs, the total heat flow can be estimated relatively directly by measuring and quantifying the amounts of heat lost via conduction, hydrothermal circulation, and eruption. This total heat flow can be used to calculate the implied magmatic flux at depth. Alternatively, magmatic flux in active arcs can be estimated from measured rates of volatile emissions, usually SO2. Unfortunately, heat flow and volatile flux data sufficiently detailed to make these calculations exist for only a handful of active arcs. In the geologic record, rates of arc magmatic flux have most frequently been estimated by measuring the preserved volumes of intrusive and extrusive products and dividing by the geochronologically determined duration of arc activity. This can be converted to heat flow by assuming a certain amount of heat carried per volume of magma. The ranges of magmatic flux estimated via either heat flow or SO2 are similar for modern arcs, but, on average, estimates from the geologic record are lower by about a factor of three (Fig. 1). This discrepancy may indicate that the assumption that preserved igneous rock volumes represent the total advective flux is a poor choice when interpreting the geologic record. Recycling of early solidified magma and loss of cumulates to the mantle may be important, i.e., the time-integrated advective flux might significantly exceed the net preserved intrusive volume. This is also supported by other lines of evidence, including geochemical mass-balance arguments, thermal models of basalt flux needed to allow substantial assimilation and/or crystal fractionation in the lower crust, high-temperature thermochronology in arcs, and thermal models of the conditions necessary to cause large, explosive eruptions from upper crustal magma chambers. Substantial recycling or convection within the arc crust is needed to sustain the heat flows required by these constraints and observed in the most active of modern arcs.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85500", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85502" } }
{"authors":"David Wilmouth::Harvard University--Joshua Klobas::Harvard University--James Anderson::Harvard University--", "title":"A21B-0129: Toward Improving Atmospheric Models and Ozone Projections: Laboratory UV Absorption Cross Sections and Equilibrium Constant of ClOOCl", "abstract":"Thirty years have now passed since the discovery of the Antarctic ozone hole, and despite comprehensive international agreements being in place to phase out CFCs and halons, polar ozone losses generally remain severe. The relevant halogen compounds have very long atmospheric lifetimes, which ensures that seasonal polar ozone depletion will likely continue for decades to come. Changes in the climate system can further impact stratospheric ozone abundance through changes in the temperature and water vapor structure of the atmosphere and through the potential initiation of solar radiation management efforts. In many ways, the rate at which climate is changing must now be considered fast relative to the slow removal of halogens from the atmosphere. Photochemical models of Earth’s atmosphere play a critical role in understanding and projecting ozone levels, but in order for these models to be accurate, they must be built on a foundation of accurate laboratory data. ClOOCl is the centerpiece of the catalytic cycle that accounts for more than 50% of the chlorine-catalyzed ozone loss in the Arctic and Antarctic stratosphere every spring, and so uncertainties in the ultraviolet cross sections of ClOOCl are particularly important. Additionally, the equilibrium constant of the dimerization reaction of ClO merits further study, as there are important discrepancies between in situ measurements and lab-based models, and the JPL-11 recommended equilibrium constant includes high error bars at atmospherically relevant temperatures (~75% at 200 K). Here we analyze available data for the ClOOCl ultraviolet cross sections and equilibrium constant and present new laboratory spectroscopic results.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85502", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85504" } }
{"authors":"Nicolas Turner::University of Hawaii--Ryan Perroy::University of Hawaii at Hilo--Kenneth Hon::University of Hawaii at Hilo--Victor Rasgado::Hawai Community College--", "title":"NH43C-1900: Kīlauea June 27th Lava Flow Hazard Mapping and Disaster Response with UAS", "abstract":"In June of 2014, pāhoehoe lava flows from the Puʻu ʻŌʻō eruption began threatening communities and infrastructure on eastern Hawaii Island. During the subsequent declared state of emergency by Hawaii Civil Defense and temporary flight restriction by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), we used a small fixed-wing Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) to collect high spatial and temporal resolution imagery over the active flow in support of natural hazard assessment by emergency managers. Integration of our UAS into busy airspace, populated by emergency aircraft and tour helicopters, required close operational coordination with the FAA and local operators. We logged >80 hours of UAS flight operations between October 2014 and March 2015, generating a dense time-series of 4-5 cm resolution imagery and derived topographic datasets using structure from motion. These data were used to monitor flow activity, document pre- and post- lava flow damage, identify hazardous areas for first responders, and model lava flow paths in complex topography ahead of the active flow front. Turnaround times for delivered spatial data products improved from 24-48 hours at the beginning of the study to ~2-4 hours by the end. Data from this project are being incorporated into cloud computing applications to shorten delivery time and extract useful analytics regarding lava flow hazards in near real-time. The lessons learned from this event have advanced UAS integration in disaster operations in U.S. airspace and show the high potential UAS hold for natural hazards assessment and real-time emergency management.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85504", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85505" } }
{"authors":"Alexandra Hutchison::University of California Riverside--Abhijit Ghosh::University of California Riverside--Yoshihiro Ito::Disaster Prevention Research Institute, Kyoto University--", "title":"S31A-2725: Toward a complete catalog of Very Low Frequency Earthquakes (VLFEs) in Cascadia using a Match Filter Technique", "abstract":"During episodic tremor and slip (ETS) events in the Cascadia subduction zone, tremor is accompanied by very low frequency earthquakes (VLFEs) that are responsible for the majority of the total moment release during an ETS event [Ghosh et al., GRL, 2015]. VLFEs characteristically emit energy in the 20-50s frequency range, but release minimal energy in higher frequency bands [e.g., Ito and Obara, GRL, 2006]. They can occur up- and downdip of the seismogenic zone [e.g., Walter et al., GRL, 2013; Asano et al., EPS, 2008] and are thought to be a result of the shear slip process on the subduction fault [Ghosh et al., GRL, 2015]. This study attempts to improve the efficiency and ability to detect VLFEs in Cascadia using a match filter technique [e.g., Shelley et al., Nature, 2007] that can detect events in data despite low signal to noise ratios. VLFE templates are selected from a 2011 ETS event. These template events are identified using a grid-search centroid moment tensor (CMT) inversion method [e.g., Ito and Obara, GRL, 2006], and typically consist of Mw 3.3 - 3.7 events with focal mechanisms consistent with the Cascadia subduction fault [Ghosh et al., GRL, 2015]. The templates are cross-correlated to continuous waveforms from the August 2011 ETS event. Candidate events are identified using six times the median absolute deviation. After eliminating the time windows with earthquakes listed in the Advanced National Seismic System composite catalog, the preliminary findings include a significant number of additional events. To further validate the match filter technique results, a grid-search CMT inversion algorithm is applied, providing focal mechanisms and source locations. Most of the events occur within or south of the Straight of Juan de Fuca, near the template event locations. Candidates with inconsistent focal mechanisms and low variance reduction values are discarded. Because these events have been confirmed with a match filter technique, visual inspection, and finally a CMT method, they can be used in future studies as additional templates to detect other VLFEs for a more robust VLFE catalog. Such a catalog can serve as a resource for a spatial-temporal analysis of their distribution, to inquiry further into the cause and mechanisms involved in slow earthquakes, and to investigate the relationship between tremor and VLFEs.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85505", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85506" } }
{"authors":"Joonhong Park::Yonsei University--", "title":"A33L-0384: Time-course monitoring of urban bioaerosol bacterial communities and its use in microbial hazard identification during Asian Dust events in Seoul, Korea", "abstract":"The microbial communities transported by Asian dust events have attracted much attention as bioaerosols because the transported airborne microbes may strongly influence the downwind ecosystems and potentially human health in East Asia. Bioaerosol study has received relatively little attention and their characterization and risk assessments remain poorly developed. We used high throughput 16S rRNA gene targeted pyrosequencing and real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) to monitor airborne bacterial communities and assess their potential risk. We monitored microbial communities in bioaerosol in Seoul between 2011 and 2013 using high volume air samplers. Six samples were collected during Asian dust (AD) events and the other 34 samples were urban air collected during non-Asian dust (non-AD) events. According to the qPCR result, the gene copy numbers of 16S rRNA genes were significantly higher during the AD events (P < 0.05) and their abundances were positively correlated with PM10 concentrations and bacterial diversities. The most abundant bacterial members (genus level) in the AD samples were Bacillus, Neisseria and E.coli/Shigella. To identify pathogenic populations, multilocus sequence typing (MLST) and virulence tests were applied using culture methods. 16S rRNA gene sequences of several pathogens were detected and their relative abundances appeared to have increased with increased concentrations of PM10. About 1% of Bacillus isolates were identified as known pathogenic B. cereus, confirming their presence in Asian dust samples. The qPCR detection of bceT gene, which codes for an enterotoxin in B. cereus group, was significantly increased in the AD dust samples over the non-AD samples. The following MLST assessment and virulence test of cultivated Bacillus isolates showed that B. cereus, B. licheniformis and B. mycoides were identified as pathogenic bacteria, and these pathogenic bacteria were usually more abundant during AD events. To assess the possible associations of identified pathogens on the hospital stroke admissions of residents in Seoul, we identified sixteen bioaerosol episodes using Poisson regression and calculated relative risk. The findings are useful in building a database for bacterial pathogens in AD events.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85506", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85507" } }
{"authors":"David Pieri::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Jorge Diaz::University of Costa Rica--Matthew Fladeland::NASA Ames Research Ctr--Geoff Bland::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Alfred Alan::Gas Lab, CICANUM, Universidad de Costa Rica--Oscar Alegria::Gas Lab, CICANUM, Universidad de Costa Rica--Maria Fabrizia Buongiorno::National Institute of Geophysics and Volcanology--Lance Christensen::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Ernesto Corrales::Gas Lab, CICANUM, Universidad de Costa Rica--Justin Linick::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Peter Mouginis-Mark::University of Hawaii at Manoa--Michael Ramsey::University of Pittsburgh--Vincent Realmuto::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Florian Schwandner::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"NH43C-1903: Volcanic sulfur dioxide and carbon dioxide measurements using small unmanned aerial systems", "abstract":"Volcanoes emit gases continuously with significant pre-post-eruption changes, mainly H2O and CO2, plus SO2, and others. The SO2/CO2 ratio changes within volcanic life cycles making it an indicator of oncoming eruption phases: it can dip weeks to months before eruptions, then increase, and decrease back to background after eruptions. Over the last five years, we have made an effort to develop small and inexpensive lighter-than-air and fixed wing unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) platforms in Costa Rica at Turrialba Volcano. Turrialba is an appropriate natural laboratory to test and prove platforms and instrumentation in low-level steady state volcanogenic gas and aerosol emissions at moderate altitudes (<12Kft ASL), where good technical infrastructure exists, with good physical access to the volcano. Our program in Costa Rica includes: (1) systematic monitoring of Turrialba from orbit with the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection radiometer (ASTER), with its thermal infrared (TIR) camera for SO2 retrieval, and more recently with GOSAT and OCO-2 for CO2; (2) in situ observations from aerostats and UAVs during ASTER overpasses, and (3) reconciliation of the orbital results with in situ data to validate mass retrieval and transport models. As part of the NASA HyspIRI Preparatory Airborne Activities program, we will conduct similar observations at Kilauea volcano using small UAVs and for both SO2 and CO2 in situ. One of the salient characteristics of the long lived Kilauea eruptions since 1983 has been the emission of SO2 in significant amounts, generating environmental stresses on local inhabitants due to lowered air quality, and stress on vegetation. Kilauea volcanic plumes, as with Turrialba, are mainly gases and liquid--SO2 is hydrolyzed to H2SO4 and the resulting highly acidic liquid aerosol is termed “vog,” an environmental health hazard. Measurement of the diffuse CO2 emissions at Kilauea will also be of interest. Such measurements at Turrialba, indicate summit CO2 concentrations of up to 4000ppmv, and flank CO2 values of up to1500ppmv. We will discuss our SO2 and CO2 results at Turrialba and in Italy, and plans for Hawaii. Work presented here was done, in part, under contract to the NASA Earth Surface and Interior Focus Area, at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory of the California Institute of Technology.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85507", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85508" } }
{"authors":"Pierre-Erik Isabelle::Laval University--Daniel Nadeau::Laval University--Annie-Claude Parent::Laval University--Alain Rousseau::Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique-Eau Terre Environnement INRS-ETE--Sylvain Jutras::Laval University--Francois Anctil::Laval University--", "title":"H31H-1524: Effects of Sloped Terrain and Forest Stand Maturity on Evapotranspiration in a Boreal Forested Catchment", "abstract":"The boreal forests are the predominant landscape of Canada, occupying 49% of its boreal zone or 27% of the country. Despite the tremendous amount of literature on such ecosystems, some gaps persist in our understanding of boreal forest evapotranspiration (ET), given that direct measurements are costly to obtain and therefore scarce in these remote territories. This is especially the case on sloped terrain, since the eddy covariance method is not traditionally used in such situations. These gaps lead to the implementation of the EVAP experimental project, which intends to produce a major leap in our understanding of the water and energy budgets of a sloped boreal forest. Starting in summer 2015, we heavily instrumented a watershed in the Montmorency Forest (47°17’ N; 71°10’ W), Quebec, Canada. Located in the Laurentian Mountains, the forest has a mean elevation of 750 m with peaks at 1000 m. The setup includes a 20-m flux tower with two separate sets of eddy correlation and net radiation measurements facing opposite directions, located over an almost mature boreal forest (logged ~20 years ago, 8-10 m trees). Eddy fluxes are also measured under the canopy with a similar setup, while a sub-watershed is instrumented with a 10-m flux tower using homologous instruments, this time on a much younger forest stand (logged ~10 years ago, 4-5 m trees). Both sites are characterized by a significant slope (~20%), facing northeast for the 20-m tower and west for the 10-m tower. With several other instruments, we are measuring every major components of both water and energy budgets, including the outgoing discharge of the watershed and subwatershed. The different slope orientations and local topography of both sites allow us to quantify the relationships between solar exposition, topographic shading and ET rates; these relationships being transposable to other mountainous forested catchments. We also investigate the presence of slope flows and assess their impact on local ET. Furthermore, this study evaluates ET differences between an actively growing forest and a mature one, providing insights on the effects past disturbances (e.g. fire, insects, logging, etc.) can have on ET rates as the forest grows.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85508", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85509" } }
{"authors":"Takehiro Hidemori::Nagoya university--Yutaka Matsumi::Nagoya University--Tomoki Nakayama::Nagoya University--Masahiro Kawasaki::Nagoya university--Hiroshi Sasago::Nagoya university--Kenshi Takahashi::Kyoto University--Ryoichi Imasu::University of Tokyo--Wataru Takeuchi::University of Tokyo--Minako Adachi::University of Tsukuba--Toshinobu Machida::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Yukio Terao::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Shohei Nomura::National Institute for Environmental Studies--Surendra Dhaka::Radio and Atmospheric Physics Lab., Rajdhani College, University of Delhi--Jagmohan Singh::Jamia Millia Islamia--", "title":"A33C-0166: Continuous in-situ methane measurements at paddy fields in a rural area of India with poor electric infrastructure, using a low-cost instrument based on open-path near-IR laser absorption spectroscopy", "abstract":"In southeast and south Asia, the previous satellite observations suggest that the methane emission from rice paddies is significant and important source of methane during rainy season. Since it is difficult to measure methane stably and continuously at rural areas such as the paddy fields in terms of infrastructures and maintenances, there are large uncertainties in quantitative estimation of methane emission in these areas and there are needs for more certification between satellite and ground based measurements. To measure methane concentrations continuously at difficult situations such as the center of paddy fields　and wetlands, we developed the continuous in-situ measurement system, not to look for your lost keys under the streetlight. The methane gas sensor is used an open-path laser based measurement instrument (LaserMethane, ANRITSU CORPORATION), which can quickly and selectively detect average methane concentrations on the optical path of the laser beam. The developed system has the power supply and telecommunication system to run the laser gas sensor in rural areas with poor electricity infrastructure. The methane measurement system was installed at paddy fields of Sonepat, Haryana on the north of Delhi in India and has been operated from the end of 2014. The air sampling along with our measurement has been carried out once a week during daytime to calibrate the laser instrument. We found that the seasonal variation of methane concentrations was different from the satellite observations and there were significant diurnal variations, which it was difficult to detect from occasional air samplings. We will present details of the measurement system and recent results of continuous methane measurements in India.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85509", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85510" } }
{"authors":"Tatsuhiko Kawamoto::Kyoto University--Andreas Hertwig::Ruhr University Bochum--Hans-Peter Schertl::Ruhr University Bochum--Walter Maresch::Ruhr University Bochum--Miki Shigeno::Kitakyushu Museum of Natural History and Human History--Yasushi Mori::Kitakyushu Museum of Natural History and Human History--Tadao Nishiyama::Kumamoto University--", "title":"V43A-3099: Saline Fluids in Subduction Channels and Mantle Wedge", "abstract":"Saline fluids can transport large-ion-lithophile elements and carbonate. Subduction-zone fluids contain salts with various amounts of NaCl equivalent similar to that of the present and/or Phanerozoic seawater (about 3.5 wt% NaCl). The salinity of aqueous fluids in the mantle wedge decreases from trench side to back-arc side, although available data have been limited. Such saline fluids from mantle peridotite underneath Pinatubo, a frontal volcano of the Luzon arc, contain 5.1 wt% NaCl equivalent and CO2 [Kawamoto et al., 2013 Proc Natl Acad Sci USA] and in Ichinomegeta, a rear-arc volcano of the Northeast Japan arc, contain 3.7 wt% NaCl equivalent and CO2 [Kumagai et al., Contrib Mineral Petrol 2014]. Abundances of chlorine and H2O in olivine-hosted melt inclusions also suggest that aqueous fluids to produce frontal basalts have higher salinity than rear-arc basalts in Guatemala arc [Walker et al., Contrib Mineral Petrol 2003]. In addition to these data, quartz-free jadeitites contain fluid inclusions composed of aqueous fluids with 7 wt% NaCl equivalent and quartz-bearing jadeitite with 4.6 wt% NaCl equivalent in supra-subduction zones in Southwest Japan [Mori et al., 2015, International Eclogite Conference] and quartz-bearing jadeitite and jadeite-rich rocks contain fluid inclusions composed of aqueous fluids with 4.2 wt% NaCl equivalent in Rio San Juan Complex, Dominica Republic [Kawamoto et al., 2015, Goldschmidt Conference]. Aqueous fluids generated at pressures lower than conditions for albite=jadeite+quartz occurring at 1.5 GPa, 500 °C may contain aqueous fluids with higher salinity than at higher pressures.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85510", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85511" } }
{"authors":"Todd Knobbe::Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute--Morgan Schaller::Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute--", "title":"PP43B-2281: Tight coupling between atmospheric ρCO2 and temperature change during the Late Triassic: observational evidence for enhanced climate sensitivity in a hothouse state", "abstract":"Climate sensitivity is the change in global equilibrium surface temperature per doubling of atmospheric ρCO2. Modern climate sensitivity, based on paleoclimate data and fast-feedback processes (Charney sensitivity), is observed to be ~3°C per doubling of CO2. However, Charney sensitivity may not be representative of ice-free hothouse states that have dominated most of Earth history where sensitivity may be higher. Few opportunities exist to empirically determine climate sensitivity during a hothouse state based on contemporaneous observations of ρCO2 and temperature. Here we present evidence for tight coupling between ρCO2 and temperature during the Late Triassic (end-Norian through Rhaetian) from the Newark basin and Lagonegro/Sicani basins, respectively. Detailed magnetostratigraphy and biostratigraphy allows for correlation between the Lagonegro and Sicani basins (Italy), which are magnetostratigraphically correlated to the Newark basin. Temperature is calculated from δ18O values of conodont apatite published from the Lagonegro and Sicani basins, while ρCO2 estimates are from pedogenic carbonates in the Newark basin. We find a distinct rise and subsequent fall in atmospheric ρCO2 that is precisely mirrored by a contemporaneous rise and fall in temperature. Between 212-209 Ma, we observe a concomitant increase in ρCO2 (1900 to 4800 ppm) and temperature (20 to 27°C), followed by a more protracted concomitant decrease in atmospheric ρCO2 (4800 to 2200 ppm) and temperature (27 to 21°C) from 209-202 Ma. We use simple numerical methods to calculate climate sensitivity for the Late Triassic from these complementary data sets and find that sensitivity through both a doubling and subsequent halving of pCO2 are on the order of 5°C, in close agreement with empirically based model assessments from younger sections. We note sensitivities as high as 7°C/doubling are observed when using the lowest pCO2 estimate allowed by the formal error window assigned to the paleosol data. These are the oldest contemporaneous and tightly coupled ρCO2 and temperature estimates, and among the only empirical indications of enhanced Earth System Sensitivity in a demonstrably ice-free world, confirming previous findings that climate sensitivity is enhanced during a hothouse state when compared to the modern.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85511", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85513" } }
{"authors":"John Cannon::University of Houston--Michael Murphy::University of Houston--Yiduo Liu::University of Houston--", "title":"T21C-2841: Himalayan Strain Accumulation 100 ka Timescales", "abstract":"Crustal scale fault systems and tectonostratigraphic units in the Himalaya can be traced for 2500 km along strike. However regional studies have shown that there is variability in the location and rate of strain accumulation which appears to be driven by Main Himalayan Thrust (MHT) geometry and convergence obliquity. GPS illuminates the modern interseismic strain rate and the historical record of great earthquakes elucidates variations in strain accumulation over 103 years. To connect these patterns with the 106 year structural and thermochronometric geologic record we examine normalized river channel steepness (ksn), a proxy for rock uplift rate, which develops over 104 – 105 years. Here we present a ksn map of the Himalaya and compare it with bedrock geology, precipitation, the historic earthquake record, GPS, seismicity, and seismotectonic models. Our map shows significant along strike changes in the magnitude of channel steepness, the areal extent of swaths of high ksn channels, and their location with respect to the range front. Differences include the juxtaposition of two narrow (30 – 40 km) range parallel belts of high ksn in west Nepal and Bhutan coincident with MHT duplexes and belts of microseismcity, with a single broad (70 km) swath of high ksn and microseismicity in central and eastern Nepal. Separating west and central Nepal a band of low ksn crosses the range coincident with the West Nepal Fault (WNF) and the lowest rate of microseismicity in Nepal. To the west the orogen is obliquely convergent and has less high ksn channels, while the orthogonally convergent region to the east contains the highest concentration of oversteepened channels in the Himalaya supporting the idea that the WNF is a strain partitioning boundary. The syntaxes are characterized by locally high channel steepness surrounded by low to moderate ksn channels consistent with the hypothesis that rapid exhumation within the syntaxes is sustained by an influx of lower crust.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85513", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85514" } }
{"authors":"Piyush Agram::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Donald Argus::JPL--Chris Rollins::California Institute of Technology--Jean-Philippe Avouac::California Institute of Technology--Sylvain Barbot::Earth Observatory of Singapore--", "title":"G13B-07: Interseismic Strain Accumulation in Metropolitan Los Angeles Distinguished from Oil and Water management using InSAR and GPS", "abstract":"Thesis. InSAR measurements from 1992 to 2012 are detecting deformation due to oil pumping and groundwater changes throughout metropolitan Los Angeles. This is allowing elastic strain build up on blind thrusts beneath the city to be accurately evaluated using GPS. Oil Fields. Pumping and repressurization of oil fields have generated substantial displacement in metropolitan Los Angeles, causing Beverly Hills, downtown, and Whittier to subside at 3-10 mm/yr and Santa Fe Springs and La Mirada to rise at 5-9 mm/yr. Aquifers. Displacements of the Santa Ana and San Gabriel Valley aquifers accumulate in response to sustained changes in groundwater over periods of either drought or heavy precipitation. Santa Ana aquifer has subsided nearly 0.1 m in response to lowering of the groundwater level by about 25 m over the past 18 years. Anthropogenic Vs. Tectonic Motion. We are assessing horizontal motions due to changes groundwater using an empirical relationship established on the basis of seasonal oscillations of Santa Ana aquifer. Anthropogenic horizontal motion is estimated to be proportional to the directional gradient in vertical motion inferred with InSAR. We are finding this rough approximation to be quite useful for evaluating deviations of GPS positions from a constant velocity. We are also constructing Mogi models of volume change in oil fields to evaluate GPS deviations. Earthquake Strain Buildup on Blind Thrust Faults. NNE contraction perpendicular to the big restraining bend in the San Andreas fault is fastest not immediately south of the San Andreas in the San Gabriel Mountains, but instead 50 km south of the fault in northern metropolitan Los Angeles. An elastic model of interseismic strain accumulation fit to GPS data and incorporating a 1D approximation of the rheology of the Los Angeles basin indicates the deep segment of the Puente Hills (–upper Elysian Park) Thrust to be slipping at 9 ±2 mm/yr beneath a locking depth of 12 ±5 km. Please see also our complementary study [Rollins et al., AGU 2015] exploring elastic models with 3D geometry. This 9 mm/yr geodetic slip rate for the Puente Hills Thrust system is faster than the 3-5 mm/yr cumulative geologic slip rate for the upper Elysian Park and Puente Hills Thrust, indicating that M 6.5 and M 7 earthquakes in metropolitan Los Angeles are more frequent than forecast.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85514", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85515" } }
{"authors":"Hyewon Yun::University of Seoul--Jungrack Kim::University of Seoul--Shih-yuan Lin::National Chengchi University--YaLun Tsai::National Chengchi University--YunSoo Choi::University of Seoul--", "title":"C53C-0802: Migration model establishment over Greenland Russell glacier with Remote Sensing observations and hydrodynamic simulations", "abstract":"The mechanism of arctic ice sheet migration is not yet fully identified. Glacial movement, specifically that involving supra/under glacial hydrological channel activities, may hold the key for understanding the acceleration of Greenland’s ice sheet change and needs to be investigated in depth and established as an integrated model. The test area on which the above studies were conducted was in the Russell glacier in western Greenland, where glacial change has been obvious for the last century and significant fluvial flows occur in meltwater outflow channels, such as the Akuliarusiarsuup Kuua and Qinnguata Kuussua rivers. All tasks in the study were conducted in three stages: 1) collecting 3D migration vectors combining C and L band differential interferometric SAR (D-InSAR) analysis, together with the in-house pixel tracking method employing optical flow and sub-pixel refinement; 2) a 2D hydrodynamic simulation based on the channel bathymetry, which was driven from calibrated LANDSAT images together with along-track stereo DTM; and 3) the model inversion to extract the bedrock height and the physical processes under the glaciers. Throughout those approaches, the researchers intended to identify firstly the interconnected processes between subglacier melt water flow and glacial migration, and also the model establishments of the involved processes. Consequently, the study revealed highly important clues about glacial migration. First of all, the importance of hydrological channel morphology as a governing factor over glaciers’ outflowed total melt water was identified. Also, it became clear that the reconstruction of sub glacial processes and morphology are feasible by employing remote sensing observations and model inversions. Those experiences will naturally lead to a more comprehensive understanding of the processes on the terminus of glacier. The overall results from these approaches were compared and validated against published bedrock heights and ice thicknesses. Based on the output of this study, the proposed method will be extended to a scheme to tackle the issues of ice sheet change occurring in the Greenland costal area.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85515", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85516" } }
{"authors":"Emmanuel Masongsong::University of California Los Angeles--Gary Glesener::University of California Los Angeles--Vassilis Angelopoulos::University of California Los Angeles--Jean Lilensten::IPAG--Lydia Bingley::University of California Los Angeles--", "title":"ED21C-0842: The Planeterrella: an Analog Model for Teaching About the Invisible Electromagnetic Processes Driving Space Weather", "abstract":"The Planeterrella can be used as an analog to help students visualize and understand the electromagnetic processes driving space weather that affect our daily lives. Solar storms and solar wind charged particles (plasma) cause ` space weather`  via their interaction with Earth's protective magnetic shield, the magnetosphere. The Planeterrella uses magnetized spheres in a vacuum chamber to demonstrate solar wind energy transfer to Earth and planets, with polar localization of aurora due to charged particles traveling along geomagnetic field lines. The Planeterrella provides a unique opportunity to experience and manipulate plasma, the dominant form of matter in our universe, yet seldom observable on Earth. Severe space weather events produce spectacular auroral displays as well as devastating consequences: radiation exposure to air and space travelers, prolonged radio blackouts, and damage to critical GPS and communications satellites. We will (1) discuss ways in which the Planeterrella may be most useful in classroom settings, including large lecture halls, laboratories, and small discussion sessions; (2) provide information on how instructors can produce their own Planeterrella for their courses; and (3) invite meeting attendees to engage in a discussion on how we might be able to improve on the current design of the Planeterrella, and how to reach students in more parts of the world.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85516", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85517" } }
{"authors":"Elizabeth Camp::Portland State University--Raúl Cal::Portland State University--", "title":"GC53E-1255: Mean Kinetic Energy Budget of Wakes Within Model Wind Farms: Comparison of an Array of Model Wind Turbines and Porous Discs", "abstract":"To optimize the power production of large wind farms, it is important to understand the flow within the wind turbine array as well as its interaction with the surrounding atmosphere. Computational simulations are often employed to study both the velocity field within and immediately above wind farms. In many computational studies, wind turbines are modeled as stationary, porous actuator discs. A wind tunnel study is done in order to compare the wakes within an array of porous discs and an equivalent array of model wind turbines. To characterize the wakes within a 4×3 model wind farm, stereoscopic particle image velocimetry (SPIV) is employed. SPIV measurements focus on the region along the centerline of the array upstream and downstream of the center turbine in the fourth row. The computed mean flow fields and turbulent stresses provide a basis to compare the near and far wakes of the turbines with those of the porous discs. The detailed analysis of the wakes for each case focus on the mean kinetic energy budget within the wakes. Examining the mean kinetic energy budget is done via computing the mean kinetic energy, flux of kinetic energy, and production of turbulence which are analogous to a measure of extracted power.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85517", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85518" } }
{"authors":"Stuart Baker::Kent State University Kent Campus--Erin Berryman::USGS Central Region Offices Denver--Todd Hawbaker::US Geological Survey--Brent Ewers::University of Wyoming--", "title":"B31A-0533: Soil respiration patterns in root gaps 27 years after small scale experimental disturbance in Pinus contorta forests", "abstract":"While much attention has been focused on large scale forest disturbances such as fire, harvesting, drought and insect attacks, small scale forest disturbances that create gaps in forest canopies and below ground root and mycorrhizal networks may accumulate to impact regional scale carbon budgets. In a lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta) forest near Fox Park, WY, clusters of 15 and 30 trees were removed in 1988 to assess the effect of tree gap disturbance on fine root density and nitrogen transformation. Twenty seven years later the gaps remain with limited regeneration present only in the center of the 30 tree plots, beyond the influence of roots from adjacent intact trees. Soil respiration was measured in the summer of 2015 to assess the influence of these disturbances on carbon cycling in Pinus contorta forests. Positions at the centers of experimental disturbances were found to have the lowest respiration rates (mean 2.45 µmol C/m2/s, standard error 0.17 C/m2/s), control plots in the undisturbed forest were highest (mean 4.15 µmol C/m2/s, standard error 0.63 C/m2/s), and positions near the margin of the disturbance were intermediate (mean 3.7 µmol C/m2/s, standard error 0.34 C/m2/s). Fine root densities, soil nitrogen, and microclimate changes were also measured and played an important role in respiration rates of disturbed plots. This demonstrates that a long-term effect on carbon cycling occurs when gaps are created in the canopy and root network of lodgepole forests.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85518", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85519" } }
{"authors":"Ji-Hye Seo::Dartmouth College--Brian Jackson::Dartmouth College--Erich Osterberg::Dartmouth College--Mukul Sharma::Dartmouth College--", "title":"C13A-0803: Separating Continental Mineral Dust from Cosmic Dust using Platinum Group Element Concentrations and Osmium Isotopes in Ancient Polar Ice", "abstract":"The platinum group element (PGEs: Pt, Pd, Rh, Ir, Os, and Ru) accumulation in ancient polar archives have been argued to trace cosmic dust and “smoke” from larger meteors but the PGE concentration data lack specificity. For example, the extent to which the terrestrial volcanism/dust has contributed to the PGE inventory of polar ice cannot be readily evaluated. Since the Os isotope compositions (187Os/188Os ratio) of the terrestrial and extraterrestrial sources are distinctly different from each other, the PGE concentrations when combined with Os isotope composition have the potential to untangle contributions from these sources. Platinum group element concentration determinations in polar ice cores are highly challenging due to their extremely low concentrations (down to 10-15 g/g or fg/g). Here, a new procedure is presented that allows PGEs and Os isotope compositions to be determined from a ~50 g sample of polar ice. Decontaminated ice-melt is spiked with 101Ru, 106Pd, 190Os, 191Ir, and 198Pt and frozen at -20 °C in quartz-glass ampoules. A mixture of purified HNO3 and H2O2 is then added and the sample is heated to 300 °C at 128bar using a High Pressure Asher. This allows all spikes to be equilibrated with the sample PGEs and all Os species are oxidized to OsO4. The resulting OsO4 is extracted using distillation, purified, and measured using negative thermal ionization mass spectrometry. PGEs are then separated and purified using two stage column chromatography and their concentrations determined by isotope dilution using a triple quadruople inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer coupled to an Apex de-solvation nebulizer. The developed method was applied to modern Greenland firn and snow. The PGE concentrations of the firn are 4.0 fg/g for Ir, 20 fg/g for Ru, 590 fg/g for Pt, 38 fg/g for Pd, and 1.3 fg/g for Os, while those of the snow are 3.0 fg/g for Ir, 53 fg/g for Ru, 360 fg/g for Pt, 32 fg/g for Pd, and 0.4 fg/g for Os, respectively. A comparison with previous procedures shows that our method yields higher PGE concentrations. The 187Os/188Os ratios for firn and the ice are 0.45 and 0.30, respectively, indicating unradiogenic aerosols as potential PGE source. Implications of these data and other data will be discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85519", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85520" } }
{"authors":"Allan Bacon::University of Florida--Katherine Akers::University of Georgia--Josh Cucinella::University of Florida--Sabine Grunwald::University of Florida--Eric Jokela::University of Florida--Daniel Markewitz::University of Georgia--Marshall Laviner::Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University--Jason Vogel::Texas A & M University College Station--Timothy Martin::University of Florida--Thomas Fox::Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University--Michael Kane::University of Georgia--Gary Peter::University of Florida--John Davis::University of Florida--C. Ross::University of Florida--", "title":"B43I-0661: Implications of Using USDA-NCSS Bulk Density to Estimate Carbon Stocks in Forest Soils Across the Southeastern United States", "abstract":"Estimates of soil bulk density (Db) are critical for accurate estimates of soil carbon (C) stocks, and thus, greatly influence the balance and interpretation of soil C budgets at plot, regional, and national scales. Large scale soil C investigations in the United States (US) almost always utilize a compilation of more than 20,000 Db observations across the US within the USDA-NRCS National Cooperative Soil Survey (NCSS) database. NCSS observations can be manually extracted as point data and then stratified or modeled by a variety of soil taxonomic, geographic, and environmental factors to estimate Db across large scales. NCSS observations also underpin the popular Soil Survey Geographic (SSURGO) database which provides continuous Db estimates across most of the US. Here, for the first time, we evaluate the precision and accuracy with which NCSS data can estimate forest soil Db across the southeastern United States and explore how using these observations impacts soil C budgets in forests across the region. We analyze and compare nearly 3,000 Db observations from the NCSS database to nearly 1,500 Db observations from the PINEMAP Tier II Network (325 experimental forest plots) across the southeastern US. We model all NCSS observations and 70% of the PINEMAP Tier II observations (a calibration dataset) separately with Random Forest algorithms to create a variety of Db predictive models at 0-10, 10-20, 20-50, and 50-100 cm depths. We validate all models against 30% of the PINEMAP Tier II observations (a validation dataset). As indexed by the mean prediction error (MPE), NCSS observations tend to over predict forest soil Db across the validation dataset by an average of 0.20 g/cc. Incorporating this positive bias of NCSS Db predictions into C stock estimates in the top 100 cm of soil across the PINEMAP Tier II network inflates C stock estimates by an average of 13 Mg/ha. Our findings identify significant potential for NCSS observations to over predict soil Db, and thus soil C stocks, in forests across the southeastern US. We suggest that similar results might be found for forest soils elsewhere in the US due to an inherent agricultural bias of NCSS data, and conclude that the potential for artificially high stock estimates warrants consideration when forest ecosystems and NCSS Db observations are included in regional soil C analyses.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85520", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85521" } }
{"authors":"Gilbert Torres Morales::University of Veracruz--Miguel Leonardo Suárez::UNAM National Autonomous University of Mexico--Raymundo Dávalos Sotelo::Instituto de Ecología--Ignacio Mora González::University of Veracruz--Saúl Castillo Aguilar::University of Veracruz--", "title":"NH13D-1951: STUDY OF SEISMIC HAZARDS IN THE CENTER OF THE STATE OF VERACRUZ, MÉXICO.", "abstract":"Preliminary results obtained from the project ` Microzonation of geological and hydrometeorological hazards for conurbations of Orizaba, Veracruz, and major sites located in the lower sub-basins: The Antigua and Jamapa`  are presented. These project was supported by the Joint Funds CONACyT-Veracruz state government. It was developed a probabilistic seismic hazard assessment (henceforth PSHA) in the central area of Veracruz State, mainly in a region bounded by the watersheds of the rivers Jamapa and Antigua, whit the aim to evaluate the geological and hydrometeorological hazards in this region. The project pays most attention to extreme weather phenomena, floods and earthquakes, in order to calculate the risk induced by previous for landslides and rock falls. In addition, as part of the study, the PSHA was developed considered the site effect in the urban zones of the cities Xalapa and Orizaba; the site effects were incorporated by a standard format proposed in studies of microzonation and its application in computer systems, which allows to optimize and condense microzonation studies in a city. The results obtained from the PSHA are presented through to seismic hazard maps (hazard footprints), exceedance rate curves and uniform hazard spectrum for different spectral ordinates, between 0.01 and 5.0 seconds, associated to selected return periods: 72, 225, 475 and 2475 years.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85521", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85523" } }
{"authors":"Philip Erickson::MIT Haystack Observatory--John Foster::MIT Haystack Observatory--Anthea Coster::MIT Haystack Observatory--John Wygant::University of Minnesota Twin Cities--John Bonnell::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"SA31E-2380: Mass Transport and Dynamics at Subauroral Latitudes During The March 17, 2013 Storm", "abstract":"During geomagnetic storm periods, plasmasphere erosion carries cold dense plasma of ionospheric origin in a storm-enhanced density plume, extending from dusk toward and through the noontime cusp and dayside magnetopause and back across polar latitudes in a polar tongue of ionization. The March 17, 2013 large storm provided an excellent opportunity to observe these mass transfer processes using a number of ground and in-situ sensors. We examine dusk sector (20 MLT) plasmasphere erosion during the 17 March 2013 storm (Dst ~ 130 nT) using simultaneous, magnetically aligned direct sunward ion flux observations at high altitude by Van Allen Probes RBSP-A (at ~3.0 Re) and at topside ionospheric heights (~840 km) by DMSP F-18, along with direct F region ionospheric observations using the subauroral Millstone Hill incoherent scatter radar system. Plasma erosion occurs at both high and low altitudes where the subauroral polarization stream flow overlaps the outer plasmasphere. At ~20 UT, RBSP-A observed ~1.2E12 m-2 s-1 erosion flux, while DMSP F-18 observed ~2E13 m-2 s-1 sunward flux. We find close similarities at high and low altitudes between the erosion plume in both invariant latitude spatial extent and plasma characteristics. Other incoherent scatter radar facilities at Poker Flat, along with both the mainland Europe and Svalbard EISCAT radars, also have observations available during this period. We use these combined, multi-scale data sets in comparison to model predictions of SAPS, e.g. BATSRUS/RAM, OpenGGCM-RM. We will highlight successes and areas where progress is needed in the quantitative understanding of cold ionospheric origin mass flow through the geospace system and its direct impact on energy coupling to the solar wind.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85523", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85525" } }
{"authors":"Enver Ramirez::CPTEC Center for Weather Forecasts and Climate Research--Pedro Dias::University of Sao Paulo--Carlos Raupp::University of Sao Paulo--Enver Manuel Amador Ramirez Gutierrez::CPTEC Center for Weather Forecasts and Climate Research--", "title":"OS51A-1980: Scale Interactions by physics in a Simplified Multiscale Coupled Atmosphere-Ocean nonlinear model", "abstract":"A simplified multiscale model of the interactions between the atmosphere and ocean is developed. Two coupled nonlinear equatorial β-plane shallow water equations are used. The nonlinearities are of two types: advective and atmosphere-ocean coupling related. To mimic the main differences between the fast-atmosphere and the slow-ocean, multi-space and multi-time scalings are adopted. Three possible regimes have been discussed: intradiurnal/synoptic/intraseasonal (ISIn), synoptic/intraseasonal/interannual-El Niño (SInEN) and intraseasonal/El Niño/decadal (InEND) regimes. Special attention is given to the SInEN regime, where simplified physical parameterizations for the atmosphere-ocean coupling are developed. In this regime, the synoptic scale is the fastest atmospheric scale, the intraseasonal is the intermediate atmosphere-ocean coupling scale and the El Niño refers to the slowest inter-annual ocean scale. Analytical solutions of the SInEN equations reveal that the slow wave amplitude evolution depends on both types of nonlinearities. Nonlinear interactions of synoptic scale atmospheric waves force intraseasonal variability not only in the atmosphere but also in the ocean through wind stress. Intraseasonal ocean temperature perturbations coupled with the atmosphere through evaporation force higher order atmospheric variability and the wave-convection coupling provides another source of higher order atmospheric variability. In the ocean, nonlinear interactions of intraseasonal ocean perturbations force interannual oceanic variability. The slowest inter-annual variability in the SInEN regime is associated with either nonlinear wind stress and advective nonlinearity.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85525", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85526" } }
{"authors":"Jeffrey Bonde::University of California Los Angeles--Stephen Vincena::University of California Los Angeles--Walter Gekelman::UCLA--", "title":"SM13E-2566: Experimental Demonstration of Collisionless Particle Acceleration Mechanisms and Entrainment of Ambient Plasma Ions by a Rapidly Expanding Diamagnetic Cavity.", "abstract":"The collisionless coupling of an expanding diamagnetic cavity to a magnetized, ambient plasma is studied in a laboratory environment using a laser-produced plasma (LPP). The seed LPP rapidly expands with velocities up to the background Alfvén speed, vexp ≤ vA. The boundary layer of the expansion is characterized with in situ diagnostics as a cylindrical version of the Ferraro-Rosenbluth current sheath. Maintenance of quasi-neutrality in this sheath forms an electric field opposing the cross-field expansion which simultaneously drives the electron current that forms the diamagnetic cavity, decelerates the LPP ions to stagnation, and accelerates ambient ions inward. The field topology across the background magnetic field is identical to that described by Bernhardt, et al. [1] for the AMPTE magnetotail barium releases. The boundary along the magnetic field, however, is shown to contain an electric field with E·B ≠ 0, which is absent in simple fluid models of diamagnetic cavities. The electric fields at this boundary help explain previous observations in the experiment of the ejection of suprathermal electrons and return currents that generated whistler- and Alfvén-wave radiation in the ambient plasma. Magnetic loops and an emissive probe measure the magnetic field and electrostatic potential along 3 dimensions while a laser-induced fluorescence scheme measures the cross-field flow of the ambient argon ions as they penetrate the diamagnetic cavity. Particle orbit solvers employing the measured fields corroborate the flow diagnostic and predict strong outflows of ambient ions with higher charge to mass ratios after diamagnetic cavity collapse. This experiment was conducted in the Large Plasma Device at the Basic Plasma Science Facility and funded by grants from the US Department of Energy and the National Science Foundation. [1] P.A. Bernhardt, R.A. Roussel-Dupre, M.B. Pongratz, J. Geophys. Res. 92, 57777 (1987).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85526", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85527" } }
{"authors":"Sarah Schliemann::Metropolitan State University of Denver--", "title":"B13F-0680: Controls on Soil Respiration in a High Elevation Alpine System and the Implications For Soil Carbon Storage in a Changing Climate", "abstract":"The alpine ecosystem is a dynamic network of heterogeneous soil and vegetation patches. Microsite characteristics are controlled by site geomorphology, underlying bedrock, and landscape position. These microsite characteristics create a complex mosaic of soil moisture and temperature regimes across the landscape. To investigate the relative influences of soil moisture and soil temperature on soil respiration in these varied microsites, 12 study sites were established in June of 2015 in Rocky Mountain National Park, Colorado. Sites were distributed across 3 plots with distinct vegetation and soil regimes: 1) Conifer forest at the upper limit of the tree line 2) Tundra characterized by shallow soil and minimal vegetation consisting of herbs and lichen 3) Tundra characterized by organic-rich, deep soil and abundant vegetation consisting of grasses and sedges. Soil respiration, soil temperature, and soil moisture were measured weekly throughout the snow-free period of 2015. Soil moisture was negatively correlated with soil respiration and soil temperature was positively correlated with soil respiration across the study sites (p <0.001). Soil respiration rates were significantly different from one another in all plots and were highest in the forest plot (maximum 9.6 µmol/ m2/sec) and much lower in the two tundra plots (< 4.5 µmol/ m2/sec) (p < 0.001). These data suggest that as the alpine climate warms, an increase in soil temperature and a longer snow-free period may result in an overall increase in the rate of soil respiration, which could alter the soil carbon pool. In addition, as temperatures rise, the tree line may migrate to a higher elevation. The results of this study suggest that with such a movement, the soil respiration rate will also increase. However the net change in soil organic matter in the newly established forest would not only depend on the soil respiration rate, but on the overall capacity of the new forest soil to retain carbon, especially recalcitrant forms.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85527", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85528" } }
{"authors":"Jian Shi::California Institute of Technology--Monica Kohler::California Institute of Technology--Jean-Paul Ampuero::California Institute of Technology--Jeannette Sutton::University of Kentucky--", "title":"NH23A-1871: Large-Amplitude, Scattered Tsunami Wave Mapping Enabled by Ocean Bottom Seismometer Array Recordings", "abstract":"A deployment of ocean bottom seismometers off the coast of southern California recorded the March 2011 Tohoku tsunami on 22 differential pressure gauges (DPGs). The DPG tsunami records across the entire array show multiple large-amplitude, coherent phases arriving one hour to more than 36 hours after the initial tsunami phase. Analysis of the DPG recordings reveals possible locations of the geographical sources that contributed to secondary tsunami arrivals in southern California. A beamforming technique is applied to the DPG data to determine the azimuths and arrival times of scattered wave energy. In addition, a backward ray tracing procedure is applied to a wide range of back azimuth starting values from the DPG array to map possible source locations. The results show several possible candidates of secondary tsunami source structures. These include the Alaskan Peninsula island chain producing a tsunami arrival ~60 minutes after the first arrival, and the Hawaiian Islands producing an arrival ~170 minutes after the first arrival. The results are mapped into modified tsunami warning messages to show how a time-varying hazard could be communicated with more effective message format and content. The results are demonstrating the effects of including clearly described locations, time of impact, and hazard impact consequences on message perception among the public.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85528", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85529" } }
{"authors":"Elyssa De Carli::University of Sydney--Thomas Hubble::University of Sydney--Dan Penny::The University of Sydney--David Petley::University of East Anglia--Samantha Clarke::University of Sydney--Rebecca Hamilton::Geocoastal Research Group--Patricia Gadd::Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation (ANSTO)--Helen Brand::Australian Synchrotron--", "title":"PP13C-2308: An unrecognised Holocene palaeo-lake at the terminus of the Murray-Darling Basin: a palaeo-discharge record and implications for current climate reconstructions", "abstract":"The 1.073 million km2 Murray-Darling River Basin (MDB) drains 14% of Australia’s landmass, incorporates Australia’s most economically important agricultural region, and presents one of Australia’s most important and contentious water security challenges. The twin Murray and Darling catchments extend from the sub-tropics to the mid latitudes, with catchment precipitation driven by synoptic-scale oceanic-atmospheric processes that include the Australian Monsoon, SAM, IPO, PDO, IOD and ENSO. In this study we report the discovery of a hitherto unrecognised terminal palaeo-lake system ‘Lake Mannum’ that existed during the middle to late Holocene, as evidenced by an extensive sequence of laminated muds. The deposit contains gray laminae enriched in smectite and Nd/Ti, diagnostic of palaeo-discharges originating from the Darling catchment. These gray laminae are set within olive-black background muds enriched in illite, K and Rb, diagnostic of palaeo-discharges originating from the Murray Catchment. The deposit reflects the hydrological regime of the MDB, representing the first in-situ palaeo-discharge record for the MDB and a proxy record for south-eastern Australia’s precipitation and hydroclimate. Given the strong influence of major oceanic-atmospheric synoptic circulation over the river system, variability in MDB discharge and delivery of suspended sediment flux to the continental shelf have been used as proxy indicators for south-eastern Australia’s palaeo-climate during the Holocene. The existence of palaeo-lake Mannum at the terminus of the MDB suggests that discharge of terrigenous sediment to the Southern Ocean was strongly suppressed during this time, meaning that Holocene climate reconstructions which rely on the marine sediment record require re-evaluation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85529", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85530" } }
{"authors":"Tim Stern::Victoria University of Wellington--Stuart Henrys::GNS Science-Institute of Geological and Nuclear Sciences Ltd--David Okaya::University of Southern California--John Louie::University of Nevada Las Vegas--Martha Savage::Victoria University of Wellington--Simon Lamb::Victoria University of Wellington--Hiroshi Sato::University of Tokyo--Rupert Sutherland::GNS Science-Institute of Geological and Nuclear Sciences Ltd--Takaya Iwasaki::University of Tokyo--", "title":"DI11B-2594: CONSTRAINTS ON THE NATURE OF THE G-BOUNDARY IN SUBDUCTING OCEANIC LITHOSPHERE, BASED ON HIGH FREQUENCY (14 HZ) SEISMIC REFLECTION DATA", "abstract":"In a recent study, we interpreted ~ 100-km-deep seismic reflections to be the base of the Pacific oceanic plate as it subducts beneath southern North Island, New Zealand*. The top of the plate is at a depth of ~ 25 km, and thus the total thickness of the subducted plate is ~ 75 km and significantly thinner than that predicted by plate cooling models for 120 Ma lithosphere. It is, however, consistent with observations of the depth to the G-discontinuity beneath the Pacific plate, which has a weak correlation with age. Recent work shows that the G-discontinuity corresponds to a change in radial anisotropy, believed to be linked to the compositional differences as the plate is created at a mid-ocean ridge. Our study imaged not one, but two, parallel, and distinct reflectors at the 100 km depth, defining a channel ~10 km thick, that lies parallel to the top of the plate (dipping ~15°). The frequency of our seismic reflections sets an important limit on the “sharpness” criterion for the boundary that generates the reflected energy. Namely, the transition zone for the acoustic impedance contact can be no thicker than about half a wavelength, or ~300 m. We argue that this is too abrupt a transition to be due to a change in radial anisotropy, and instead requires a change in phase from rock, to rock with melt and/or water. Moreover the simplest explanation of an ~10 km thick channel with sharp acoustic boundaries at top and bottom is a weak zone with a significant melt fraction (~2%) in a zone of enhanced mantle shear, although other interpretations ( e.g. elastically accommodated grain-boundary sliding) are possible. If we are imaging the G-boundary, then it is both sharp and likely to be actively accommodating some relative plate motion, as the plate slides over the underlying mantle. * Stern T.A. et al (2015). A seismic reflection image for the base of a tectonic plate, Nature, 518, pp. 85-88, doi10.1038/Nature14146.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85530", "section":"Earth's Deep Interior"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85531" } }
{"authors":"Esther Eke::Utah State University--Peter Wilcock::Utah State University--", "title":"EP51A-0906: Don't Fence Me In: Free Meanders in a Confined River Valley", "abstract":"The interaction between meandering river channels and inerodible valley walls provides a useful test of our ability to understand meander dynamics. In some cases, river meanders confined between valley walls display distinctive angular bends in a dynamic equilibrium such that their size and shape persist as the meander migrates. In other cases, meander geometry is more varied and changes as the meander migrates. The ratio of channel to valley width has been identified as a useful parameter for defining confined meanders, but is not sufficient to distinguish cases in which sharp angular bends are able to migrate with little change in geometry. Here, we examine the effect of water and sediment supply on the geometry of confined rivers in order to identify conditions under which meander geometry reaches a persistent dynamic equilibrium. Because channel width and meander geometry are closely related, we use a numerical meander model that allows for independent migration of both banks, thereby allowing channel width to vary in space and time. We hypothesize that confined meanders with persistent angular bends have smaller transport rates of bed material and that their migration is driven by erosion of the cutbank (bank-pull migration). When bed material supply is sufficiently large that point bar deposition drives meander migration (bar-push migration), confined meander bends have a larger radius of curvature and a geometry that varies as the meander migrates. We test this hypothesis using historical patterns of confined meander migration for rivers with different rates of sediment supply and bed material transport. Interpretation of the meander migration pattern is provided by the free-width meander migration model.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85531", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85532" } }
{"authors":"Makoto Okamura::University of Kochi--Hiromi Matsuoka::Kochi University--Mitsuo Tsuzuki::--Kenji Toraya::Nagoya University--", "title":"NH33A-1910: Large Nankai Trough earthquake and tsunami found in lacustrine deposits through late Holocene-time along the western coast of Kii Peninsula, southwestern Japan", "abstract":"We continue paleo-seismic studies through Late Holocene-time in coastal marsh ponds along the Nankai Trough . These ponds which are co-seismic subsidence areas have continuous muddy sediment stratigraphy and sporadic tsunami induced coarse material. Well controlled age data has been collected from the core-sample that contains plant remains under anoxic sedimentary environment . Total 21 cores collected from two coastal ponds Ashihama-ike and Zasa-ike which locate behind beach-ridge along southeastern coast of Kii Peninsula under Tokai/Tonankai Earthquake assumption areas. Tsunami events are recognized after eighty AMS C-14 dating through recent (core top) to 7300 yBP interval. Among these interval, two remarkable events found in sediment, which are 2050yBP to 2300yBP (=2K event) and 1000yBP to 1100 yBP. 2k event consists thick sand, well rounded gravel in chaotic mud and wood fragment derived from forests surrounding lakes. Later event is correspond to the historical Ninna Nankai earthquake (AD887, 26 August under the old lunar calendar).　Rather small events are occurred in 3500yBP and 1100yBP. These events are found from both of two ponds which has two kilometers in distance each other. Cores bottom are composed of 7400yBP huge-tsunami event caused simultaneously by the Kikai-caldera eruption (over 170 cubic km ejecta) is just covered with the Kikai-Akahoya (K-Ah) tephra. The 2K and volcanic tsunami events have also found widely, not only Kii Peninsula but southern Shikoku (Tokushima Pref. and Kochi Pref.) and Kyushu through the Nankai Trough.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85532", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85533" } }
{"authors":"Mark Conrad::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--John Curtis::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Lydia Smith::University of California Berkeley--Markus Bill::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Margaret Torn::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--", "title":"B21D-0496: Fate and Transport of Methane Formed in the Active Layer of Alaskan Permafrost", "abstract":"Over the past 2 years a series of tracer tests designed to estimate rates of methane formation via acetoclastic methanogenesis in the active layer of permafrost soils were conducted at the Barrow Environmental Observatory (BEO) in northernmost Alaska. The tracer tests consisted of extracting 0.5 to 1.0 liters of soil water in gas-tight bags from different features of polygons at the BEO, followed by addition of a tracer cocktail including acetate with a 13C-labeled methyl group and D2O (as a conservative tracer) into the soil water and injection of the mixture back into the original extraction site. Samples were then taken at depths of 30 cm (just above the bottom of the active layer), 20 cm, 10 cm and surface flux to determine the fate of the 13C-labeled acetate. During 2014 (2015 results are pending) water, soil gas, and flux gas were sampled for 60 days following injection of the tracer solution. Those samples were analyzed for concentrations and isotopic compositions of CH4, DIC/CO2 and water. At one site (the trough of a low-centered polygon) the 13C acetate was completely converted to 13CH4 within the first 2 days. The signal persisted for throughout the entire monitoring period at the injection depth with little evidence of transport or oxidation in any of the other sampling depths. In the saturated center of the same polygon, the acetate was also rapidly converted to 13CH4, but water turnover caused the signal to rapidly dissipate. High δ13C CO2 in flux samples from the polygon center indicate oxidation of the 13CH4 in near-surface waters. Conversely, CH4 production in the center of an unsaturated, flat-centered polygon was relatively small 13CH4 and dissipated rapidly without any evidence of either 13CH4 transport to shallower levels or oxidation. At another site in the edge of that polygon no 13CH4 was produced, but significant 13CO2/DIC was observed indicating direct aerobic oxidation of the acetate was occurring at this site. These results suggest that a longer thaw season resulting from a warming climate may increase the net CH4 flux from saturated polygonal features, but that effect may be minimized by increased drainage due to degradation of low-centered centered polygons.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85533", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85534" } }
{"authors":"Timothy Murtha::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--Olaf Schroth::University of Sheffield--Brian Orland::University of Georgia--Lacey Goldberg::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--Tara Mazurczyk::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--", "title":"PA33B-2180: A Tale of Two Regions: Landscape Ecological Planning for Shale Gas Energy Futures", "abstract":"As we increasingly embrace deep shale gas deposits to meet global energy demands new and dispersed local and regional policy and planning challenges emerge. Even in regions with long histories of energy extraction, such as coal, shale gas and the infrastructure needed to produce the gas and transport it to market offers uniquely complex transformations in land use and landcover not previously experienced. These transformations are fast paced, dispersed and can overwhelm local and regional planning and regulatory processes. Coupled to these transformations is a structural confounding factor. While extraction and testing are carried out locally, regulation and decision-making is multilayered, often influenced by national and international factors. Using a geodesign framework, this paper applies a set of geospatial landscape ecological planning tools in two shale gas settings. First, we describe and detail a series of ongoing studies and tools that we have developed for communities in the Marcellus Shale region of the eastern United States, specifically the northern tier of Pennsylvania. Second, we apply a subset of these tools to potential gas development areas of the Fylde region in Lancashire, United Kingdom. For the past five years we have tested, applied and refined a set of place based and data driven geospatial models for forecasting, envisioning, analyzing and evaluating shale gas activities in northern Pennsylvania. These models are continuously compared to important landscape ecological planning challenges and priorities in the region, e.g. visual and cultural resource preservation. Adapting and applying these tools to a different landscape allow us to not only isolate and define important regulatory and policy exigencies in each specific setting, but also to develop and refine these models for broader application. As we continue to explore increasingly complex energy solutions globally, we need an equally complex comparative set of landscape ecological planning tools to inform policy, design and regional planning. Adapting tools and techniques developed in Pennsylvania where shale gas extraction is ongoing to Lancashire, where industry is still in the exploratory phase offers a key opportunity to test and refine more generalizable models.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85534", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85535" } }
{"authors":"Teddi Herring::University of Calgary--Adam Pidlisecky::University of Calgary--", "title":"NS43B-1964: Using Contaminant Transport Simulations to Optimize Electrical Resistivity Tomography Survey Design for Improved Contaminant Detection at Lined Ponds", "abstract":"The saline flowback water produced during hydraulic fracturing is often stored in lined surface ponds. Leakage from these ponds poses a significant environmental threat and there is a need for a reliable and economical long term monitoring strategy. Electrical resistivity tomography (ERT), being sensitive to changes in groundwater salinity, is therefore well suited to such a problem. The goal of this work is to compare the leak detection capabilities of a surface ERT array and a downhole ERT array. In this study several plausible 3D electrical conductivity models were created that simulated a contaminant plume evolving over time, using realistic contaminant concentrations, plume geometries, water saturation profiles, and seasonal temperature profiles. The forward modeled data were used to identify the advantages and drawbacks of using each ERT array orientation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85535", "section":"Near Surface Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85536" } }
{"authors":"Kazunari Matsunaga::Nagoya University--Kanako Seki::STEL, Nagoya University--Dave Brain::University of Colorado at Boulder--Takuya Hara::Space Sciences Laboratory--Kei Masunaga::STEL, Nagoya University--James McFadden::Space Sciences Laboratory--Jasper Halekas::University of Iowa--David Mitchell::Space Sciences Laboratory--Christian Mazelle::IRAP CNRS--John Connerney::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Bruce Jakosky::University of Colorado at Boulder--", "title":"P21A-2071: Comparison of Martian magnetic pileup boundary with ion composition boundary observed by MAVEN", "abstract":"Martian upper atmosphere directly interacts with the solar wind, since Mars does not possess the intrinsic global magnetic field. This interaction forms a transition region between the shocked solar wind (magnetosheath) and the ionosphere, in which characteristic boundary structures are embedded. Previous studies have shown existence of the induced magnetosphere or magnetic pileup region in the transition region. Mars Global Surveyor (MGS) observed the magnetic pileup boundary (MPB), a boundary between the magnetosheath and the magnetic pileup region by its magnetometer and electron reflectometer [e.g., Vignes et al., 2000, Trotignon et al., 2006]. On one hand, Phobos 2 and Mars Express (MEX) observed the ion composition boundary (ICB) by their ion mass analyzer [e.g., Breus et al., 1991, Dubinin et al., 2006], where the ion composition changes from the solar wind origin to planetary origin dominant. Due to the lack of continuous simultaneous observations of the magnetic field and ion composition, however, relations between MPB and ICB are far from understood. In this study, we investigate relative locations and characteristics of MPB and ICB and their dependence on solar wind parameters, utilizing a full package of plasma instruments onboard Mars Atmosphere and Volatile EvolutioN (MAVEN). We conducted a statistical analysis of the ion, electron, and magnetic field data obtained by MAVEN from November 2014 to March 2015 in order to investigate relations between MPB and ICB. We identified MPB from the electron and magnetic field data by inspection based on Trotignon et al. [2006]. We calculated the density ratio between the planetary heavy ions and the solar wind protons to investigate the ion composition around MPB. Results show that there is a north-south asymmetry in locations of MPB and ICB. Observations also indicate that the relative location of MPB and ICB has deference between dayside and nightside. The MPB locations also depend on the solar wind parameters. We will also report on the dependence of MPB and ICB on the solar wind velocity, density, and dynamic pressure. Reference: Vignes et al., 2000, GRL, DOI: 10.1029/1999GL010703, Trotignon et al., 2006, PSS, DOI: 10.1016/j.pss.2006.01.003, Breus et al., 1991, JGR, DOI: 10.1029/91JA01131, Dubinin et al., 2006, SSR, DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-70943-7_8", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85536", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85537" } }
{"authors":"Achraf Koulali::Australian National University--Simon McClusky::ANU--Paul Tregoning::Australian National University--Michael Moore::Geoscience Australia--", "title":"G13A-1001: Post-seismic induced deformation after great earthquakes in the 21st century", "abstract":"Surface deformation after major earthquakes shows an ongoing transient signal known as post-seismic relaxation, which extends thousands of kilometers from the rupture area and continues in time for up to decades. The magnitude of this transient motion violates the secular/linear assumption made in current terrestrial reference frame definitions, which have significant ramifications for regional tectonic interpretations and global studies such as sea level rise that require reference frame accuracy greater than this level. In this study we show the importance of accounting for the post-seismic relaxation signal in GPS time series when defining a stable reference frame and estimating inter-seismic velocities. We investigate by means of long-term GPS time series analysis the far-field post-seismic effect of Sumatra Mw 9.1 and Macquarie Ridge Mw 8.1 earthquakes and show how deformation from great earthquakes can introduce a change in the long-term horizontal velocity rate of up to 5mm/yr. We show also how post-seismic deformation can affect regional tectonic interpretations and the detection of low strain fault zones in rapid rotating micro-plates. We highlight the role of post-seismic deformation on the characterization of the earthquake cycle as seen from long-term GPS time series.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85537", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85538" } }
{"authors":"Jeff Kennedy::USGS Arizona Water Science Center--Jorge Ramirez-Hernandez::Universidad Autonoma Baja California--Eliana Rodriguez Burgueño::Universidad Autonoma Baja California--", "title":"H21B-1356: Experimental Floods in a Time of Drought: The 2014 Pulse Flow in the Lower Colorado River, Arizona, USA, and Mexico", "abstract":"In March and April, 2014, an unprecedented experimental “pulse flow” with a total volume of over 100 million cubic meters (81,000 acre-feet) of water was released from Morelos Dam into the normally dry lower Colorado River below Yuma, Arizona, for the primary purpose of restoring native vegetation and habitat. Significant infiltration and attenuation of the flood peak occurred within the limitrophe reach that forms the US-Mexico border, with total volume reduced to 57 million cubic meters at the southerly international boundary at San Luis Rio Colorado, Sonora, Mexico (32 kilometers downstream). Groundwater levels in piezometers adjacent to the stream channel rose as much as 10 meters, and surface water/groundwater connection was established throughout the reach, despite depths-to-water greater than 15 meters prior to the pulse flow. Based on groundwater levels, a groundwater mound remained in the vicinity of the stream channel for several months but had largely dissipated into the regional groundwater system by fall 2014. Ultimately, a large amount of water was moved from storage in an upstream reservoir (Lake Mead), where it is potentially available to many users but where evaporation losses can be high, to the regional aquifer in the Yuma–Mexicali area, where the water could be available to local users but cannot be precisely quantified as it moves through the groundwater system. During a time of drought, tradeoffs between local vs. upstream storage, and reservoir vs. subsurface storage, will likely be increasingly important considerations in planning future experimental floods on the Colorado River.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85538", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85539" } }
{"authors":"Elizabeth Wiggins::University of California Irvine--Sander Veraverbeke::University of California Irvine--John Henderson::Atmospheric and Environmental Research--Anna Karion::NOAA Boulder--Jakob Lindaas::Harvard University--John Miller::NOAA Boulder--Roisin Commane::Harvard University--Steven Wofsy::Harvard University--Charles Miller::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--James Randerson::University of California Irvine--Colm Sweeney::NOAA Boulder--", "title":"A52C-05: The influence of synoptic-scale climate variability on boreal forest fire emissions and trace gas variability in Alaska", "abstract":"We examined climate controls on fire emissions and trace gas variability using three distinct conceptual models of fire emissions that draw upon different types of remote sensing information. The three approaches were derived from satellite-derived observations of active fires, satellite-derived estimates of fire radiative power, and daily emissions estimates from the Alaska Fire Emissions Database model (AKFED). In our analysis, we assessed the relative importance of different climate variables and fire weather indices in explaining the temporal variability of satellite-detected fire thermal anomalies and emissions within the state of Alaska during the summer of 2013. We evaluated the performance of each emissions model using trace gas observations from the CARVE (CRV) tower in Fox, Alaska. In our approach we used an inverse atmospheric transport model, the coupled Weather Research and Forecasting/Stochastic Time-Inverted Lagrangian Transport (WRF-STILT) model, to link the fire emissions with the trace gas observations. MISR plume observations were used to inform the injection height distribution in WRF-STILT and CRV-derived estimates of CO/CO2 emission ratios were used to convert modeled carbon emissions into trace gas fluxes. Local climate variables had varying levels of influence on fire dynamics in interior Alaska, with vapor pressure deficit explaining more variability than temperature or relative humidity alone. Combined use of the emissions products and WRF-STILT allowed us identify fire contributions to the CRV time series on a daily basis, and to isolate contributions from individual fires that had different temporal dynamics and interactions with atmospheric transport. Both hourly and daily observed CO mole fractions were highly correlated with the emissions models convolved with WRF-STILT (r2 values up to 0.63), providing some confidence in the ability of satellite-constrained models to capture daily and synoptic patterns in fire emissions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85539", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85540" } }
{"authors":"Stephanie Hampton::Washington State University--", "title":"ED13H-06: Preparing the Next Generation of Environmental Scientists to Work at the Frontier of Data-Intensive Research", "abstract":"The science necessary to unravel complex environmental problems confronts severe computational challenges - coping with huge volumes of heterogeneous data, spanning vast spatial scales at high resolution, and requiring integration of disparate measurements from multiple disciplines. But as cyberinfrastructure advances to support such work, scientists in many fields lack sufficient computational skills to participate in interdisciplinary, data-intensive research. In response, we developed innovative training workshops for early-career scientists, in order to explore both the needs and solutions for training next-generation scientists in skills for data-intensive environmental research. In 2013 and 2014 we ran intensive 3-week training workshops for early-career researchers. One of the workshops was run concurrently in California and North Carolina, connected by virtual technologies and coordinated schedules. We attracted applicants to the workshop with the opportunity to pursue data-intensive small-group research projects that they proposed. This approach presented a realistic possibility that publishable products could result from 3 weeks of focused hands-on classroom instruction combined with self-directed group research in which instructors were present to assist trainees. Instruction addressed 1) collaboration modes and technologies, 2) data management, preservation, and sharing, 3) preparing data for analysis using scripting, 4) reproducible research, 5) sustainable software practices, 6) data analysis and modeling, and 7) communicating results to broad communities. The most dramatic improvements in technical skills were in data management, version control, and working with spatial data outside of proprietary software. In addition, participants built strong networks and collaborative skills that later resulted in a successful student-led grant proposal, published manuscripts, and participants reported that the training was a highly influential experience.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85540", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85541" } }
{"authors":"Jialiang Chen::China University of Mining Technology--Yang Ju::China University of Mining Technology--Yongming Yang::China University of Mining Technology--Yingchun Guo::partner--", "title":"NG13A-1874: Research on crack propagation induced by hydraulic fracturing with low permeability rocks in different buried depths", "abstract":"In recent years, the proportion of unconventional energy has increase in the whole energy system. Deep research about the influence factors of crack propagation has big significance in efficient energy exploration. In the paper, four groups of low permeable sandstones in different depths are applied to do the hydraulic fracturing experiments. Through CT scanning technique and 3-D reconstruction algorithm, the authors obtain the characteristics of crack propagation and spatial distribution, and discus the effect of buried depth to the crack propagation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85541", "section":"Nonlinear Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85542" } }
{"authors":"Ping Lu::Tongji University--", "title":"A Stereo Multi-sensor Network for Giant Landslide Monitoring", "abstract":"This contribution indicates a newly developed Stereo Multi-sensor Landslide Monitoring Network (SMSLMN) based on a uniform temporal geo-reference system. This SMSLMN system integrated various sensors, including space-borne, airborne, in-situ and underground sensors, which can quantitatively monitor the slide-body and obtain critical information of movement in high frequency with high resolution. Observation capabilities indicators for different sensors were proposed in order to obtain the optimal sensor combination groups and observation strategy. Meanwhile, adaptive networking and reliable data communication methods were developed to apply intelligent observation and sensor data transmission. Some key technologies, such as intelligence extraction technology, data access frequency adaptive adjustment technology, different sensor synchronization control technology were developed to overcome those problems in complex observation environment. The collaboratively observation data have been transferred to the remote data center where is thousands miles away from the giant landslide spot. This SMSLMN framework mainly concentrates on constructing a monitoring network with four hierarchies of observation: (1) space-borne sensors including VHR optical images (P5, IKONOS, WorldView-1, 2 and ZY-3) and a series of high resolution X-band TerraSAR-X SAR images; (2) aerial observations by a group of UAV scanning schemes with the ground-based controlling platform, the produced the 1:2000 scale DOM mosaic images and the generated high resolution DTM; (3) a series of ground-based sensors involving in-situ sensors such as inclinometers and piezometers with smart self-forming seamless real-time data communication and terrestrial remote sensing platform of laser scanning; and (4) internal investigation from geophysical approaches such as seismological and electromagnetic analyses. This SSN-based monitoring system for Xishan Village landslide based on multiple surveying and mapping approaches is expected to provide solid monitoring data for landslide models and data assimilation for potential landslide hazard prediction and risk assessment in the near future.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85542", "section":""} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85543" } }
{"authors":"Eduardo Lima::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--Roger Fu::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--Benjamin Weiss::MIT--David Glenn::Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics--Pauli Kehayias::Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics--Ronald Walsworth::Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics--", "title":"GP43A-1236: Evaluating the Paleomagnetic Potential of Zircons", "abstract":"Because zircon crystals commonly display high natural U/Pb ratios and excellent resistance to weathering, paleomagnetic data collected from zircons potentially enjoy the benefits of excellent age controls and minimal remagnetization from infiltrating fluids. We present rock magnetic and paleomagnetic experiments on two sets of zircons with contrasting geologic histories to determine the viability of zircons as paleomagnetic recorders. First, we characterize primary zircons from the Bishop Tuff, a pyroclastic deposit formed at 767±1 ka in a magnetic field of 43±3 µT. Magnetic field maps with ~10 µm resolution obtained with the nitrogen vacancy (NV) diamond magnetometer indicate that most ferromagnetic sources are situated within zircon interiors, suggesting a primary origin (Fig. 1A). Stepwise thermal demagnetization reveals well-defined components of magnetization blocked in most samples up to 580˚C, indicating the dominance of magnetite, which is the expected primary phase. The intensity of natural remanent magnetization (NRM) is typically 10-12 Am2. Ongoing Thellier-Thellier dual heating experiments will evaluate the accuracy of recovered paleointensities. Second, we study Hadean and Archean detrital zircons from the Jack Hills. In contrast to the Bishop Tuff samples, magnetic microscopy and stepwise thermal demagnetization demonstrate that the remanent magnetization of >80% of Jack Hills zircon are carried exclusively by secondary hematite situated on grain surfaces (Fig. 1B). NRM intensities range between 10-15 and 10-12 Am2 and decrease by a factor of several upon chemical removal of secondary hematite. Our analyses reveal a diversity of ferromagnetic mineralogies and distribution in natural zircons. While some zircon populations carry reliable paleomagnetic information, others are dominated by secondary ferromagnetic phases. Without the application of high-resolution magnetic microscopy techniques to identify the main ferromagnetic carrier, it is difficult to establish that Jack Hills zircons retain a credible primary record of the Hadean and Archean geomagnetic field.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85543", "section":"Geomagnetism and Paleomagnetism"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85544" } }
{"authors":"Adriana Bailey::University of Washington Seattle Campus Joint Institute for the Study of the Atmosphere and Ocean--David Noone::Oregon State University--Robert Wood::Univ Washington--", "title":"A33G-0256: Evaluating cloud precipitation efficiency with satellite retrievals of water isotopologues", "abstract":"The efficiency with which clouds precipitate is believed to influence climate by modifying cloud lifetime and, ultimately, cloud amount. Aerosols can influence this linkage by reducing the effective radii of cloud droplets and suppressing precipitation. This relationship, however, is not unidirectional. Cloud precipitation efficiency can also regulate particle concentrations, since precipitation effectively scavenges aerosols from the atmosphere. One challenge in studying how aerosols, clouds, and precipitation processes interrelate is that observational constraints are difficult to attain. This work evaluates the ability of isotope ratios in water vapor to quantify cloud precipitation efficiency across the tropical and subtropical oceans. Theory suggests isotope ratios will record the precipitation efficiency of a convective plume, since heavier isotopologues precipitate preferentially; and a recent analysis of in situ measurements from the Mauna Loa Observatory (MLO, Hawaii, USA) verifies this to be the case. The challenge now lies in understanding whether satellite retrievals of isotope ratios in water vapor are sensitive enough to track precipitation efficiency globally. To answer this question, vertical profiles of the D/H ratio derived from NASA’s Tropospheric Emission Spectrometer (TES) are first compared with the MLO in situ measurements. A qualitative match indicates the satellite retrievals can distinguish high from low precipitation efficiency convection. To expand the analysis geographically, TES profiles between 40°S and 40°N are compared with estimates of precipitation efficiency derived from the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) and ECMWF’s ERA-Interim. Retrievals are binned by lower-tropospheric humidity and by vertical velocity in order to minimize large-scale thermodynamical influences. Co-located cloud retrievals provide the context necessary to evaluate the utility of these new estimates in elucidating cloud feedbacks on climate.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85544", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85545" } }
{"authors":"Benjamin Abban::University of Tennessee--Thanos Papanicolaou::University of Tennessee--Christopher Wilson::University of Tennessee--Ozan Abaci::Gama Power Systems Engineering and Contracting Inc--Kenneth Wacha::University of Iowa--Doug Schnoebelen::University of Iowa--Bruce Rhoads::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Mingjing Yu::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--", "title":"EP23E-04: Sediment Fingerprinting in Intensively Managed Landscapes: Application of an Enhanced Bayesian Un-mixing Framework that accounts for Spatiotemporal Heterogeneity to Study Intra-Seasonal Trends in Source Contributions", "abstract":"We apply an enhanced revision of a Bayesian un-mixing framework for estimating sediment source contributions to an intensively managed watershed in the US Midwest that is characterized by spatiotemporal heterogeneity. The framework has two key parameters, namely a and b, that account for spatial origin attributes and the time history of sediments delivered to the watershed outlet, respectively. The probabilistic treatment of these parameters incorporates variability in source erosion processes, as well as the delivery times and storage of eroded material within the watershed. Uncertainty in source contribution estimates in our approach is quantified naturally through the use of Markov Chain Monte Carlo simulations for estimating the posterior probability density functions. The studied watershed is the 26 km² South Amana Sub-Watershed located within the Clear Creek Watershed (CCW), IA, which is part of the Critical Zone Observatory for Intensively Managed Landscapes (IML-CZO). Utilizing stable isotopes of C and N, the Bayesian framework predicted trends in mean source contributions and uncertainty that were in agreement with observations from other studies. Terrestrial sources were found to dominate sediment contributions in the earlier stages of the growing season when land cover was small and the hydrologic forcing was large. Instream sources became more dominate during the latter stages when land cover was well-established and more extensive. Also, the effects of spatial heterogeneity and sediment travel time and delivery on uncertainty in sources contribution estimates were adequately captured. The results clearly showed a reduction in uncertainty when watershed connectivity was greatest and considerable amounts of material were delivered to the collection point at the outlet. On-going application of the framework to the Upper Sangamon River Basin (USRB), which also part of the IML-CZO and has distinct features from CCW, is expected to shed more light on the effects of connectivity and other landscape attributes on sediment source dynamics over the growing season.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85545", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85546" } }
{"authors":"Kenneth Wacha::University of Iowa--Thanos Papanicolaou::University of Tennessee--Timothy Filley::Purdue University--Tingyu Hou::Purdue University--Benjamin Abban::University of Tennessee--Christopher Wilson::University of Tennessee--John Boys::University of Tennessee--", "title":"B53G-0658: Enrichment Ratio and Aggregate Stability Dynamics in Intensely Managed Landscapes", "abstract":"Challenges in understanding the soil carbon dynamics within intensely managed landscapes (IMLs), found throughout much the US Midwest, is highly complex due to the presence of heterogeneous landscape features and properties, as well as a mosaic of physical and biogeochemical processes occurring at different time scales. In addition, rainfall events exacerbate the effects of tillage by the impact of raindrops, which break down aggregates that encase carbon and dislodge and entrain soil particles and aggregates along the downslope. The redistribution of soil and carbon can have huge implications on biogeochemical cycling and overall carbon budgeting. In this study, we provide some rare field data on the mechanisms impacting aggregate stability, enrichment ratio values to estimate fluxes of carbon, as well as lignin chemistry to see influences on oxidation/mineralization rates. Rainfall simulation experiments were conducted within agricultural fields. Experiments were performed on the midslope (eroding) and toeslope (depositional) sections of representative hillslopes, under a variety of land managements, including row crop (conventional and conservation) and restored grasslands. Sensors were utilized to capture the evolution of soil moisture, temperature, microbial respiration pulses, and discharge rates to identify pseudo-steady state conditions. Samples collected at the weir outlet were tested for sediment concentrations and size fractions, as well as carbon and lignin fluxes. Preliminary findings show that conservation management practices have higher aggregate stability and decreased mass fluxes of carbon in the downslope than conventional tillage techniques.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85546", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85547" } }
{"authors":"Yuta Shimoyama::Osaka University--Hidenori Terasaki::Osaka University--Satoru Urakawa::Okayama University--Yusaka Takubo::Osaka University--Tetsu Watanuki::JAEA Japan Atomic Energy Agency--Yoshinori Katayama::JAEA Japan Atomic Energy Agency--Tadashi Kondo::Osaka University--", "title":"DI31B-2595: Thermal elastic properties of liquid Fe-C at high pressure", "abstract":"Planetary outer core contains some light elements and these elements affect thermo-elastic parameters of pure iron. The effect of light elements on density and bulk modulus of liquid iron is necessary for estimating of these core compositions. Sound velocity of liquid iron alloys is also important for identifying light elements in the core by comparison with observed seismic data. We have measured sound velocity and density of liquid Fe-C simultaneously at high pressure. High pressure experiments were performed using a DIA-type cubic anvil press (SMAP-180) at BL22XU beamline, SPring-8 synchrotron in Japan. Sound velocity (VP) was measured using pulse-echo overlapping method (Higo et al., 2009). Density (ρ) was measured using X-ray absorption method (Katayama et al., 1993). We measured velocity and density of liquid Fe-C between 1.1-5.8 GPa and 1480-1700 K. Obtained density and velocity of Fe-C was found to increase with pressure. This study shows the VP of liquid Fe-C decreased with increasing temperature. Previous study of liquid Fe-S shows little change with increasing temperature at all pressure conditions (Nishida et al., 2013, Jing et al., 2014). We fit the relationship between VP and pressure using Murnaghan’s equation of state. We obtained KS0 = 102.5(1.2) GPa, K’S = 5.2(0.4) at 1700 K. Comparison of the present data with previous study, KS is similar to liquid Fe but liquid Fe-S is small. We compared the relation between density and sound velocity of liquid Fe-C. We have found that the behavior of liquid Fe-C is similar to that of liquid Fe in the Birch’s plot. The effect of carbon on liquid Fe is small on Birch’s plot.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85547", "section":"Earth's Deep Interior"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85549" } }
{"authors":"Jasmine Remillard::Columbia University of New York--", "title":"A22A-07: Using In Situ Observations and Satellite Retrievals to Constrain Large-Eddy Simulations and Single-Column Simulations: Implications for Boundary-Layer Cloud Parameterization in the NASA GISS GCM", "abstract":"Two low-cloud periods from the CAP-MBL deployment of the ARM Mobile Facility at the Azores are selected through a cluster analysis of ISCCP cloud property matrices, so as to represent two low-cloud weather states that the GISS GCM severely underpredicts not only in that region but also globally. The two cases represent (1) shallow cumulus clouds occurring in a cold-air outbreak behind a cold front, and (2) stratocumulus clouds occurring when the region was dominated by a high-pressure system. Observations and MERRA reanalysis are used to derive specifications used for large-eddy simulations (LES) and single-column model (SCM) simulations. The LES captures the major differences in horizontal structure between the two low-cloud fields, but there are unconstrained uncertainties in cloud microphysics and challenges in reproducing W-band Doppler radar moments. The SCM run on the vertical grid used for CMIP-5 runs of the GCM does a poor job of representing the shallow cumulus case and is unable to maintain an overcast deck in the stratocumulus case, providing some clues regarding problems with low-cloud representation in the GCM. SCM sensitivity tests with a finer vertical grid in the boundary layer show substantial improvement in the representation of cloud amount for both cases. GCM simulations with CMIP-5 versus finer vertical gridding in the boundary layer are compared with observations. The adoption of a two-moment cloud microphysics scheme in the GCM is also tested in this framework. The methodology followed in this study, with the process-based examination of different time and space scales in both models and observations, represents a prototype for GCM cloud parameterization improvements.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85549", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85551" } }
{"authors":"Michael Saha::University of Virginia Main Campus--Todd Scanlon::University of Virginia Main Campus--Paolo D'Odorico::University of Virginia Main Campus--", "title":"GC42B-07: Evidence of Fire-Induced Rainfall Modification in sub-Saharan Africa", "abstract":"Recent studies have highlighted the importance of the land surface in promoting or inhibiting convective development and precipitation. At the same time, fire represents a dramatic, instantaneous shift in energy and mass fluxes at the surface. We examine the role that fires play in modifying subsequent precipitation on seasonal timescales across sub-Saharan Africa. Using MODIS burned area product and TRMM daily precipitation we find that fire suppresses total wet season accumulated rainfall in arid and semiarid regions. In the regions receiving less than 500 mm of mean annual precipitation (MAP) this suppression amounts to deficits of up to 30% of MAP. This observed pattern is consistent between drylands in both hemispheres. We consider the possible mechanisms of fire-induced rainfall suppression, including changes in albedo and reduced evapotranspiration. We propose a novel feedback between rainfall and fire that is manifested by an oscillation between low rainfall and high rainfall years. Observational evidence supports this hypothesis. Finally, using MODIS land cover data we find that the regions where we observe fire-induced rainfall suppression are comprised of a higher than expected proportion of croplands and cropland mosaic. We highlight the possibility of a novel anthropogenic influence on hydrologic cycling in regions where water resources are scarce.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85551", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85552" } }
{"authors":"David Whittleston::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--Judah Cohen::Atmospheric and Environmental Research Lexington--Dara Entekhabi::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--", "title":"A21F-0221: Tropospheric response to varying approaches of prescribing Siberian snow anomalies", "abstract":"Variability in Siberian snow extent during the fall has been shown to impact northern hemisphere winter weather through its influence on surface heating patterns and resulting wave activity fluxes. More recently, sea ice variability has also been implicated as a potential driver of winter weather and extremes, leading to a number of studies comparing the impact of prescribed sea ice and snow cover anomalies. Whilst many GCMs have the inbuilt functionality to prescribe sea ice and SSTs, this is generally not the case for snow. It is therefore important to establish a realistic and consistent method of prescribing snow anomalies. We report on a suite of GCM experiments that investigate the sensitivity of the atmospheric response to the timing of a single, large anomaly of snow water equivalent. Albedo and surface fluxes in these perturbed snow experiments are compared to observations from daily MEaSUREs snow extent and AMSR-E/Aqua snow water equivalent. We then use wave flux and atmospheric mode (e.g. the NAO) diagnostics to track the response of the troposphere to the timing of these anomalies.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85552", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85553" } }
{"authors":"Jung Hee Ryu::Texas Tech University--Katharine Hayhoe::Texas Tech University--", "title":"A51H-0165: Large-scale processes relevant to extreme hot and dry summer conditions in the South Central U.S.: Comparing observations with CMIP5 simulations", "abstract":"In recent years, record high temperatures combined with extreme precipitation deficits have led to record-breaking droughts that have affected the Southern Plains. The 2011 drought and heat wave caused over $12B in damages across the SP region. Here, we combine station data with reanalysis to identify the hottest summers in the last 30 years. Consistent with previous analysis, we find that very hot temperatures over the region are highly correlated both precipitation as well as soil moisture deficits. Atmospheric circulation in the SP region during summer is generally dominated by the North Atlantic Subtropical High (NASH), which extends westward from its winter position over the Atlantic. The anticyclonic circulation could play a role in reducing convective precipitation as well as preventing disturbances from moving into the SP region. Examining the NARR reanalysis for the hottest summers of record, we find that the anticyclonic circulation associated with the NASH extends over the SP region relatively earlier in the summer and results in a comparatively stronger anticyclonic circulation, which in turn seems to be influenced by the large-scale climate variability. Specifically, the negative phase of the Pacific/North American (PNA) teleconnection pattern is characterized by high pressure anomalies across the southeastern and south central U.S. during summer. The two hottest years in the last three decades (1980 and 2011) also correlate with the two strongest negative PNA phases over that time. One of the anticipated impacts of human-induced climate change is the increased risk of hot and potentially dry summers across the SP region. For that reason, we also assess to what extent CMIP5 models are able simulate the large-scale processes that, according to reanalysis, are closely related to extreme hot and dry summer conditions over the Southern Plains. Composite maps of extreme heat years simulated in the models do display a stronger-than-average anticyclonic circulation that intensifies during summer, although the amplitude is much less than the reanalysis data. How the climate models simulate the relationship of the PNA to the temperature and precipitation over the SP region and whether/how it could be related to projected changes in future extreme summers will be also discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85553", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85555" } }
{"authors":"Ian Howat::OH St Univ-Earth Sciences--Alberto Behar::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Santiago de la Peña::Byrd Polar Research Center--Stephen Price::Los Alamos National Laboratory--Darin Desilets::Organization Not Listed--James Crowell::Arizona State University--Jekan Thangavelautham::Arizona State University--Gary Womack::Quaesta Instruments--", "title":"C22B-08: The first long-term and continuous measurements of firn mass-balance and compaction on the Greenland Ice Sheet", "abstract":"Direct, continuous measurements of ice sheet surface mass balance are lacking, particularly in the accumulation zone where the surface snow and firn varies in density. Nearly all of our knowledge of surface mass variability comes from snow pit and ice core stratigraphy, providing annual resolution with relatively large uncertainties that are inadequate for constraining meteorological models. Further, little information is available on how the density of the firn layer changes with time, hampering efforts to estimate mass change from altimetry measurements. Since the spring of 2012 we have obtained continuous measurements of changes in firn column density and, since spring 2015, mass balance at multiple sites in the percolation zone of the Jakobshavn Isbrae catchment in western Greenland. Surface mass balance is obtained from both snow scale and cosmic ray sensors, providing cross-validation. Following a description of the multiple technologies employed, we assess variations in compaction and surface mass balance in relation to meteorological variables. We then compare our measurements to model estimates and conclude with recommendations for continued and expanded observational activities.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85555", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85556" } }
{"authors":"Hiroaki Ozasa::IHI Corporation--Hitoshi Mikada::Kyoto University--Fumitoshi Murakami::JGI, Inc.--Ehsan Jamali Hondori::JGI, Inc.--Junichi Takekawa::Kyoto University--Eiichi Asakawa::JGI, Inc.--Fumio Sato::IHI Corporation--", "title":"NS42A-07: Development of Towed Marine Seismic Vibrator as an Alternative Seismic Source", "abstract":"The principal issue with respect to marine impulsive sources to acquire seismic data is if the emission of acoustic energy inflicts harm on marine mammals or not, since the volume of the source signal being released into the marine environment could be so large compared to the sound range of the mammals. We propose a marine seismic vibrator as an alternative to the impulsive sources to mitigate a risk of the impact to the marine environment while satisfying the necessary conditions of seismic surveys. These conditions include the repeatability and the controllability of source signals both in amplitude and phase for high-quality measurements. We, therefore, designed a towed marine seismic vibrator (MSV) as a new type marine vibratory seismic source that employed the hydraulic servo system for the controllability condition in phase and in amplitude that assures the repeatability as well. After fabricating a downsized MSV that requires the power of 30 kVA at a depth of about 250 m in water, several sea trials were conducted to test the source characteristics of the downsized MSV in terms of amplitude, frequency, horizontal and vertical directivities of the generated field. The maximum sound level satisfied the designed specification in the frequencies ranging from 3 to 300 Hz almost omnidirectionally. After checking the source characteristics, we then conducted a trial seismic survey, using both the downsized MSV and an airgun of 480 cubic-inches for comparison, with a streamer cable of 2,000m long right above a cabled earthquake observatory in the Japan Sea. The result showed that the penetration of seismic signals generated by the downsized MSV was comparable to that by the airgun, although there was a slight difference in the signal-to-noise ratio. The MSV could become a versatile source that will not harm living marine mammals as an alternative to the existing impulsive seismic sources such as airgun.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85556", "section":"Near Surface Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85557" } }
{"authors":"John Nieber::Univ of Minnesota, Twin Cities--Jonathan Hess::Scott County Soil and Water Conservation District--Stephen Sebestyen::USDA Forest Service--", "title":"H11E-1386: HSPF Modeling of a Forested Headwater in North-Central Minnesota", "abstract":"The Hydrologic Simulation Program Fortran (HSPF) model is a conceptual based model, in contrast to the alternative grid-based hydrologic models. In its application, the HSPF model has been applied almost exclusively to watersheds scales larger than HUC 14. We applied the HSPF model to a small forested watershed located at the Marcell experimental forest in north-central Minnesota. The watershed has an area of 9.7 hectares and is one of six experimental watersheds managed by the U.S. Forest Service. These experimental watersheds have been in operation since 1955. While some of the experimental watersheds have experienced environmental disturbance (e.g., clear-cutting), the S2 watershed has been in continuous forested condition for the last century. The S2 watershed is composed of forested upland hillslopes that connect to a raised bog area. The forest is aspen (Populus sp.) and birch (Betula papyrifera) on uplands and spruce (Picea mariana) on a 3.2 ha central bog. The upland soils are composed of a shallow sandy loam overlying clay loam which impedes vertical water movement. Water input to the peatland is either from direct precipitation or from the upland hillslopes. Water flux from the bog is either through ET, groundwater seepage losses, or surface discharge to a stream network. Streamflow is measured at a v-notch weir. Within the watershed two upland hillslopes have been isolated to monitor surface runoff and subsurface flow since the 1980’s. The HSPF model was applied to the watershed using precipitation and other meteorological data collected within the watershed or nearby on the Experimental Forest. The model representation of the watershed included one element for the upland hillslope area, and one element for the bog area. Daily flows from water years 1991 to 1995 were used to calibrate the model. An equal period of time was used to validate the model from 1996 to 2000. Nash-Sutcliffe values were very good for both calibration and validation. Calibration monthly and daily NS were 0.86 and 0.80, respectively. Validation monthly and daily NS were 0.85 and 0.71, respectively. The calibration time period overestimated flow by 0.33% while the validation period overestimated flow by 2.69%. Reduction of model accuracy was mainly related to the intermittency of the upland runoff and bog outflows.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85557", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85558" } }
{"authors":"Yan Zhao::IGSNRR Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research, CAS--", "title":"GC13G-1244: Threshold effects in the vegetation response to Holocene climate changes in central Asia", "abstract":"Understanding the response of ecosystems to past climate is critical for evaluating the impacts of future climate changes. A relatively abrupt vegetation shift in response to the late Holocene gradual climate changes has been well documented for the Sahara-Sahel ecosystem. However, whether such threshold shift is of universal significance remains to be further addressed. Here, we examine the vegetation-climate relationships in central Asia based on four newly recovered Holocene pollen records and a synthesis on previously published pollen data. The results show that the orbital-induced gradual climate trend during the Holocene led to two major abrupt vegetation shifts, and that the timings of these shifts are highly dependent of the local rainfall conditions. Instead, the mid-Holocene vegetation remained rather stable despite of the changing climate. These new findings demonstrate generally significant threshold and truncation effects of climate changes on vegetation, as are strongly supported by surface pollen data and LPJ-GUESS modeling. The results also imply that using pollen data to reconstruct past climate changes is not always straightforward. Our findings have important implication for understanding the potential effects of global warming on dryland ecosystem change.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85558", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85559" } }
{"authors":"Thiago Brito::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--", "title":"SM51C-2582: Modeling the O+ Transit from Ionosphere to Plasmasheet", "abstract":"The ion population in the magnetospheric lobes may play an important role as a seed population for the O+ in the plasmasheet and ultimately in the ring current during active times. It is not clear what is the pathway of ionospheric oxygen to the ring current and what are the mechanisms responsible for their transit from the ionosphere in the time scales observed. A more complete understanding of the nature of this transport mechanism for ions, in particular of O+, is essential to understanding plasmasheet and ring current dynamics. We present a modeling effort based on a 3D MHD global magnetosphere code (LFM), coupled with a guiding center test particle code to explore an O+ activity-dependent transport path from the ionosphere to the plasmasheet and the effects of the O+ in transit between these two regions during transitions from quiet to storm times. The overarching scientific objective of this investigation is to understand and quantify through test particle simulations the dynamics of this transport. A better understanding of this transport mechanism could improve large-scale magnetospheric models that can in turn be used to investigate the effects of energetic O+ on ring current dynamics.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85559", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85560" } }
{"authors":"Emmanuel David::Australian National University--Christopher Cline::Australian National University--Ian Jackson::Australian National University--Ulrich Faul::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--Andrew Berry::Australian National University--", "title":"MR23A-2644: The Influence of Water on Seismic Wave Speeds and Attenuation in the Upper Mantle: an update from the Laboratory", "abstract":"A fine-grained synthetic olivine (Fo90) polycrystal, doped with ~0.04 wt. % TiO2, has been prepared with ~70 wt. ppm H2O accommodated in the remarkably stable Ti-clinohumite defect typical of natural olivines from the Earth’s generally water-undersaturated upper mantle (Berry et al., 2005). A precision-ground specimen of this material, sleeved in Pt tubing within a mild-steel jacket, was tested in torsional forced oscillation at seismic frequencies (mHz-Hz) and temperatures to 1200 °C, under 200 MPa confining pressure. The shear modulus was observed to decrease systematically with increasing oscillation period and temperature, accompanied by monotonically increasing dissipation, which are characteristic of absorption band or high-temperature-background behaviour. In a previous preliminary report, the new data were compared with the model of Jackson and Faul (Phys. Earth Planet. Interiors, 2010) for a suite of essentially anhydrous Ti-free olivine polycrystals, evaluated at the 25 μm grain size of the hydrous titaniferous olivine specimen, showing that the latter is vastly more dissipative than its anhydrous equivalent (by an order of magnitude at 1200 °C) and correspondingly lower in shear modulus. The results of additional experiments now better constrain the mechanical behaviour of the enclosing Pt sleeve and allow direct comparison with data for an anhydrous titaniferous olivine of comparable grain size. The latest results confirm a very strong influence of water on seismic wave attenuation, even under the water-undersaturated conditions expected to prevail in the Earth’s upper mantle.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85560", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85561" } }
{"authors":"Lyatt Jaegle::University of Washington--Joel Thornton::Univ Washington - Seattle--Steven Brown::NOAA Boulder--Viral Shah::University of Washington Seattle Campus--Felipe Lopez-Hilfiker::University of Washington Seattle Campus--Ben Lee::University of Washington Seattle Campus--Jessica Haskins::University of Washington Seattle Campus--Dorothy Fibiger::National Science Foundation--Erin McDuffie::University of Colorado at Boulder--Tamara Sparks::University of California Berkeley--Carlena Ebben::University of California Berkeley--Paul Wooldridge::UC Berkeley--Ronald Cohen::University of California Berkeley--Patrick Veres::NOAA Boulder--Andrew Weinheimer::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Denise Montzka::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Jack Dibb::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Jason Schroder::Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences--Pedro Campuzano Jost::University of Colorado Boulder--Doug Day::CIRES--Jose Jimenez::University of Colorado at Boulder--Amy Sullivan::Colorado State University--Hongyu Guo::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--Rodney J Weber::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--Jaime Green::North Carolina A & T State University--Marc Fiddler::North Carolina A & T State University--Solomon Bililign::North Carolina A & T State University--Teresa Campos::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Eric Apel::University Corporation for Atmospheric Research--Nicola Blake::University of California Irvine--Samuel Hall::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Kirk Ullmann::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Glenn Wolfe::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Joshua DiGangi::NASA Langley Research Center--Thomas Hanisco::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--J. Brian Leen::Los Gatos Research--", "title":"A34F-03: Sources, Chemistry, and Transport of Pollutants over the Eastern United States During the WINTER 2015 Aircraft Campaign", "abstract":"The Wintertime Investigation of Transport, Emission, and Reactivity (WINTER) campaign used the NCAR/NSF C-130 aircraft to sample the composition of the lower troposphere over the Eastern United States between February 2 and March 13, 2015. The main scientific objectives of WINTER were to: 1) Characterize the chemical transformations of wintertime emissions via multiphase, nocturnal, and photochemical processes, 2) Assess the dominant mechanisms of secondary aerosol formation and quantify the geographical distribution of inorganic and organic aerosol types during winter, 3) Constrain wintertime emission inventories of key pollutants and characterize their export over the North Atlantic. Here, we will present an overview of the WINTER observations obtained during 13 flights near major metropolitan areas (New York City, Washington D.C.-Baltimore, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, Atlanta), along the Ohio River Valley, and in aged pollution plumes over the Atlantic Ocean. We will analyze the WINTER observations using the GEOS-Chem chemical transport model in a nested-grid configuration with a 25 km horizontal resolution over N. America, focusing in particular on evaluating current anthropogenic emission inventories and the wintertime budget of reactive nitrogen species.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85561", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85562" } }
{"authors":"Inakwu Odeh::University of Sydney--Xing Zou::University of Sydney--", "title":"B33E-0778: Modelling the Spatial-temporal Variation of Urban/peri-urban Forests and Their Ecosystem Services: a Case Study of North-West Sydney", "abstract":"In terms of total terrestrial sequestered carbon, the global soils and forests are recognized as the predominant C sinks. Even though urban forests stored a relatively small proportion of the total terrestrial C, they also provide other important ecosystem services such as improving air quality, cooling effect in buildings and aesthetics. Thus in view of these environmental services the quantification of urban tree is increasingly viewed as essential to the understanding of how these ecosystem services can be optimized. The aims of this paper are to: i) quantify the spatial-temporal distribution of urban forests in Northwest Sydney using remote sensing techniques; ii) determine the total urban C-storage over many decades; iii) apply UFORE model to estimate air pollutant removal ability of urban forest. The results revealed the estimated total trees in Northwest Sydney in 2011was approximately 2.3 million. These urban forests potentially store an estimated 1.3 million tons of carbon in various forms such as biomass, soil carbon, etc. The relative carbon sequestration rate of these trees was estimated to be about 20,500 tC/yr (equivalent to $AUD 467,000/year). Furthermore, the results show that trees near buildings can potentially avoid $AUD 12.9 million of energy cost every year and 70000 tons of carbon emission, the latter which is equivalent to additional savings of nearly $AUD 1.6 million per year. We also estimated that urban forests in the study area could potentially remove about 44,600 tons of pollutants (mainly greenhouse gases) annually equivalent to a saving of about $AUD 409 million per year. Thus the results reveal the spatial-temporal variation of urban vegetation in the last twenty year between 1991 and 2011. The study has showcased the importance and potential role of urban forests in preserving carbon and thus reducing GHG emissions into atmosphere. Furthermore, these results highlight the significant value of urban forests in term of pollutant removal. The significance of these outcomes, if extrapolated to other cities of Australia and the world, is huge.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85562", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85563" } }
{"authors":"Alex Zachman::North Carolina State University Raleigh--Paul Sturm::Ridge to Reefs--Roberto Viqueira Ríos::Protectores de Cuencas inc--", "title":"H21G-1480: The Presence and Origin of Enterococcus faecalis in Cabo Rojo, Puerto Rico", "abstract":"Currently, a watershed management plan is being developed for Cabo Rojo region in Southwest Puerto Rico. This project fills in major gaps for water quality data on the Rio Viejo, a tributary on the Guanajibio River. The Rio Viejo flows through the town of Cabo Rojo, a town of 51,245 people. The project has identified 5 sites along the river to track bacterial loads. In the tropics, Enterococcus faecalis is an important indicator for fecal contamination in surface waters as it does not reproduce as quickly soils as E. coli. A combination of EPA 1600 and 9230B from Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater for identification of E. faecalis were utilized. The assay is a four step procedure that identifies the four criteria of bacteria in the group D Streptococcus system. The criteria require that the bacteria are Gram-positive cocci and Esculin-positive. There also must be growth in Brain Heart Infusion Broth at 35C and 45C as well as growth in Brain Heart Infusion broth + 6.5% NaCl. Further research will be conducted at North Carolina State University to ascertain the vertebrate species that is the source of the contamination through the use of qPCR.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85563", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85564" } }
{"authors":"Paul Houser::George Mason University Fairfax--Ako Heidari::George Mason University Fairfax--", "title":"H43E-1554: How is climate change impacting precipitation?", "abstract":"Water is an integrating component of the climate, energy and geochemical cycles, regulating biological and ecological activities at all spatial and temporal scales. The most significant climate warming manifestation would be a change in the distribution of precipitation and evaporation, and the exacerbation of extreme hydrologic events. Due to this phenomenon and the fact that precipitation is the most important component of the water cycle, the assumption of its stationarity for water management and engineering design should be examined closely. The precipitation Annual Maximum Series (AMS) over some stations in Virginia based on in situ data were been used as a starting point to examine this important issue. We analyzed the AMS precipitation on NOAA data for the stations close to Fairfax VA, looked for trends in extreme values, and applied our new method of Generalized Extreme Value (GEV) theory based on quadratic forms to address changes in those extreme values and to quantify non-stationarities. It is very important to address the extreme values of precipitation based on several statistical tests to have better understanding of climate change impact on the extreme water cycle events. In our study we compared our results with the conclusion on NOAA atlas 14 Ap.3 which found no sign of precipitation non-stationarity. We then assessed the impact of this uncertainty in IDF curves on the flood map of Fairfax and compared the results with the classic IDF curves.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85564", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85565" } }
{"authors":"Hirotaka Saito::Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology--Takeshi Saito::Saitama University--Shoichiro Hamamoto::University of Tokyo--Toshiko Komatsu::Saitama University--", "title":"H21A-1349: Modeling temperature dependence of trace element concentrations in groundwater using temperature dependent distribution coefficient", "abstract":"In our previous study, we have observed trace element concentrations in groundwater increased when groundwater temperature was increased with constant thermal loading using a 50-m long vertical heat exchanger installed at Saitama University, Japan. During the field experiment, 38 degree C fluid was circulated in the heat exchanger resulting 2.8 kW thermal loading over 295 days. Groundwater samples were collected regularly from 17-m and 40-m deep aquifers at four observation wells located 1, 2, 5, and 10 m, respectively, from the heat exchange well and were analyzed with ICP-MS. As a result, concentrations of some trace elements such as boron increased with temperature especially at the 17-m deep aquifer that is known as marine sediment. It has been also observed that the increased concentrations have decreased after the thermal loading was terminated indicating that this phenomenon may be reversible. Although the mechanism is not fully understood, changes in the liquid phase concentration should be associated with dissolution and/or desorption from the solid phase. We therefore attempt to model this phenomenon by introducing temperature dependence in equilibrium linear adsorption isotherms. We assumed that distribution coefficients decrease with temperature so that the liquid phase concentration of a given element becomes higher as the temperature increases under the condition that the total mass stays constant. A shape function was developed to model the temperature dependence of the distribution coefficient. By solving the mass balance equation between the liquid phase and the solid phase for a given element, a new term describing changes in the concentration was implemented in a source/sink term of a standard convection dispersion equation (CDE). The CDE was then solved under a constant ground water flow using FlexPDE. By calibrating parameters in the newly developed shape function, the changes in element concentrations observed were quite well predicted. The model developed in this study is a novel attempt to simulate changes in groundwater quality during thermal loading to the subsurface. Although more experimental and theoretical studies need to be done, the results of this study at least provide some good insights regarding behavior of trace elements in groundwater when temperature is changing.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85565", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85566" } }
{"authors":"Jong Kuk Hong::Korea Polar Research Institute--Young-Gyun Kim::Korea Polar Research Institute--Young Keun Jin::Korea Polar Research Institute--Michael Riedel::GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel--Humfrey Melling::Institute of Ocean Sciences--Seung-Goo Kang::Korea Polar Research Institute--Scott Dallimore::Geological Survey of Canada Pacific--", "title":"GC23J-1214: Marine heat flow measurements across subsea permafrost limit in the eastern Mackenzie Trough, Canadian Beaufort Sea", "abstract":"Marine heat flow measurements using a 5 m-long Ewing-type heat probe were made during Korean icebreaker R/V Araon’s Arctic expeditions (ARA04C in 2013 and ARA05B in 2014) to better know the shallow subsurface thermal structure in the eastern slope of Mackenzie Trough, the Canadian Beaufort Sea, in which associative geological processes of permafrost degradation and gas hydrate dissociation occur because of long-term warming since the Last Glacial Maximum. Heat flow in the continental slope was collected for the first time and is rather higher than those from deep boreholes (up to a few km below the seafloor) in the continental shelf. However, the smaller geothermal gradient and thermal conductivity were observed from sites along a transect line across permafrost limit on the eastern slope of the trough. It is noted that geothermal gradients are relatively constant in the vicinity of permafrost limit but are much smaller (even minus) only at deeper depths with positive bottom water temperature. Reason for such distribution is unclear yet. Based on observed geothermal gradient and bottom water temperature, permafrost table shown in subbottom profile seems to be controlled not by temperature. On the other hand, our finding of permafrost evidence on the other subbottom profile located landward may support that permafrost limit in the trough is along with ~100 m isobath.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85566", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85568" } }
{"authors":"Scott Hamshaw::University of Vermont--Mandar Dewoolkar::University of Vermont--Donna Rizzo::University of Vermont--Jarlath ONeil-Dunne::University of Vermont--Jeff Frolik::University of Vermont--Thomas Bryce::University of Vermont--Anna Waldron::University of Vermont--", "title":"NH43C-1913: Quantifying streambank erosion: a comparative study using an unmanned aerial system (UAS) and a terrestrial laser scanner", "abstract":"Streambank erosion is a common non-point source contributing to suspended sediment and nutrient loading of waterways, and recently has been estimated to account for 30-80% of sediment loading into receiving waters. There is interest in developing reliable methods to quantify bank erosion in watersheds, so effective management strategies can be devised. However, current methods can be either cost prohibitive or unreliable. Direct measurement approaches (surveys and erosion pins) are labor intensive and yield site-specific measurements that are limited for extrapolation to larger scales. Similar issues arise with analytical methods such as slope stability analysis, which require material parameters that are resource intensive to determine. Newer approaches such as use of aerial LiDAR data have proved effective for watershed level assessment, but come with long turnaround times and high cost. Terrestrial laser scanning (TLS) is also effective and offers high accuracy, however collection over large areas is impractical and post-processing is labor intensive. New technology in the form of unmanned aerial systems (UAS) has the potential to significantly enhance the ability to monitor channel migration and quantify bank erosion at variable scales. In this study, 20 km of the Mad and Winooski Rivers in Vermont were flown using a senseFly eBee UAS. Flights were made in spring and fall 2015 in leaf-off conditions with selected portions also flown after large storms in the summer. Change in bank profiles between spring and fall flights provide a comprehensive estimate of bank erosion along the study reaches. Six sites with varying bank heights, erosion sensitivity, and vegetation conditions were selected for simultaneous surveying using a TLS. Point cloud data from both the TLS and UAS were compared to assess the accuracy of the UAS for capturing the bank profile. Changes in bank cross-sections and in volumes calculated from 3D digital surface models were used to compare the UAS and TLS methods. Ascertaining the accuracy of UAS in measuring streambank profiles will determine the appropriateness of the technology for long-term monitoring of bank erosion. The ability for rapid deployment, covering large areas, and fast post-processing allow for more comprehensive monitoring of streambank erosion in river systems.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85568", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85569" } }
{"authors":"Walid Majid::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"P23B-2133: Electrical Activity in Martian Dust Storms", "abstract":"Dust storms on Mars are predicted to be capable of producing electrostatic fields and discharges, even larger than those in dust storms on Earth. Such electrical activity poses serious risks to any Human exploration of the planet and the lack of sufficient data to characterize any such activity has been identified by NASA’s MEPAG as a key human safety knowledge gap. There are three key elements in the characterization of Martian electrostatic discharges: dependence on Martian environmental conditions, frequency of occurrence, and the strength of the generated electric fields. We will describe a proposed program using NASA’s Deep Space Network (DSN) to carry out a long term monitoring campaign to search for and characterize the entire Mars hemisphere for powerful discharges during routine tracking of spacecraft at Mars on an entirely non-interfering basis. The resulting knowledge of Mars electrical activity would allow NASA to plan risk mitigation measures to ensure human safety during Mars exploration. In addition, these measurements will also allow us to place limits on presence of oxidants such as H2O2 that may be produced by such discharges, providing another measurement point for models describing Martian atmospheric chemistry and habitability. Because of the continuous Mars telecommunication needs of NASA’s Mars-based assets, the DSN is the only instrument in the world that combines long term, high cadence, observing opportunities with large sensitive telescopes, making it a unique asset worldwide in searching for and characterizing electrostatic activity at Mars from the ground.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85569", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85570" } }
{"authors":"Nian-Wei Ku::Texas A & M University College Station--Sorin Popescu::Texas A&M University--", "title":"B43C-0554: Global Forest Canopy Height Maps Validation and Calibration for The Potential of Forest Biomass Estimation in The Southern United States", "abstract":"In the past few years, three global forest canopy height maps have been released. Lefsky (2010) first utilized the Geoscience Laser Altimeter System (GLAS) on the Ice, Cloud and land Elevation Satellite (ICESat) and Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) data to generate a global forest canopy height map in 2010. Simard et al. (2011) integrated GLAS data and other ancillary variables, such as MODIS, Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (STRM), and climatic data, to generate another global forest canopy height map in 2011. Los et al. (2012) also used GLAS data to create a vegetation height map in 2012.Several studies attempted to compare these global height maps to other sources of data., Bolton et al. (2013) concluded that Simard’s forest canopy height map has strong agreement with airborne lidar derived heights. Los map is a coarse spatial resolution vegetation height map with a 0.5 decimal degrees horizontal resolution, around 50 km in the US, which is not feasible for the purpose of our research. Thus, Simard’s global forest canopy height map is the primary map for this research study. The main objectives of this research were to validate and calibrate Simard’s map with airborne lidar data and other ancillary variables in the southern United States. The airborne lidar data was collected between 2010 and 2012 from: (1) NASA LiDAR, Hyperspectral & Thermal Image (G-LiHT) program; (2) National Ecological Observatory Network’s (NEON) prototype data sharing program; (3) NSF Open Topography Facility; and (4) the Department of Ecosystem Science and Management at Texas A&M University. The airborne lidar study areas also cover a wide variety of vegetation types across the southern US. The airborne lidar data is post-processed to generate lidar-derived metrics and assigned to four different classes of point cloud data. The four classes of point cloud data are the data with ground points, above 1 m, above 3 m, and above 5 m. The root mean square error (RMSE) and coefficient of determination (R2) are used for examining the discrepancies of the canopy heights between the airborne lidar-derived metrics and global forest canopy height map, and the regression and random forest approaches are used to calibrate the global forest canopy height map. In summary, the research shows a calibrated forest canopy height map of the southern US.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85570", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85571" } }
{"authors":"Alan Kasprak::Utah State University--James Brasington::Queen Mary, University of London--Konrad Hafen::Utah State University--Joseph Wheaton::Utah State University--", "title":"EP51A-0907: An Efficient and Imperfect Model for Gravel-Bed Braided River Morphodynamics: Numerical Simulations as Exploratory Tools", "abstract":"Numerical models that predict channel evolution through time are an essential tool for investigating processes that occur over timescales which render field observation intractable. However, available morphodynamic models generally take one of two approaches to the complex problem of computing morphodynamics, resulting in oversimplification of the relevant physics (e.g. cellular models) or faithful, yet computationally intensive, representations of the hydraulic and sediment transport processes at play. The practical implication of these approaches is that river scientists must often choose between unrealistic results, in the case of the former, or computational demands that render modeling realistic spatiotemporal scales of channel evolution impossible. Here we present a new modeling framework that operates at the timescale of individual competent flows (e.g. floods), and uses a highly-simplified sediment transport routine that moves volumes of material according to morphologically-derived characteristic transport distances, or path lengths. Using this framework, we have constructed an open-source morphodynamic model, termed MoRPHED, which is here applied, and its validity investigated, at timescales ranging from a single event to a decade on two braided rivers in the UK and New Zealand. We do not purport that MoRPHED is the best, nor even an adequate, tool for modeling braided river dynamics at this range of timescales. Rather, our goal in this research is to explore the utility, feasibility, and sensitivity of an event-scale, path-length-based modeling framework for predicting braided river dynamics. To that end, we further explore (a) which processes are naturally emergent and which must be explicitly parameterized in the model, (b) the sensitivity of the model to the choice of particle travel distance, and (c) whether an event-scale model timestep is adequate for producing braided channel dynamics. The results of this research may inform techniques for future morphodynamic modeling that seeks to maximize computational resources while modeling fluvial dynamics at the timescales of change.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85571", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85572" } }
{"authors":"Laura Bonzanigo::The World Bank--Patrick Ray::University of Massachusetts Amherst--", "title":"PA11B-2156: Lessons Learned from Applications of a Climate Change Decision Tree toWater System Projects in Kenya and Nepal", "abstract":"The Decision Tree Framework developed for the World Bank’s Water Partnership Program provides resource-limited project planners and program managers with a cost-effective and effort-efficient, scientifically defensible, repeatable, and clear method for demonstrating the robustness of a project to climate change. At the conclusion of this process, the project planner is empowered to confidently communicate the method by which the vulnerabilities of the project have been assessed, and how the adjustments that were made (if any were necessary) improved the project’s feasibility and profitability. The framework adopts a “bottom-up” approach to risk assessment that aims at a thorough understanding of a project’s vulnerabilities to climate change in the context of other nonclimate uncertainties (e.g., economic, environmental, demographic, political). It helps identify projects that perform well across a wide range of potential future climate conditions, as opposed to seeking solutions that are optimal in expected conditions but fragile to conditions deviating from the expected. Lessons learned through application of the Decision Tree to case studies in Kenya and Nepal will be presented, and aspects of the framework requiring further refinement will be described.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85572", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85573" } }
{"authors":"Chelsea Pederson::University of Miami--James Klaus::University of Miami--Donald McNeill::University of Miami--Peter Swart::University of Miami--", "title":"B21C-0449: Geochemical and Textural Comparison of Modern and Ancient Freshwater Microbial Mud: A Direct Calibration in the Florida Everglades", "abstract":"The goal of this study is to directly calibrate a freshwater microbial carbonate deposit currently forming in the Florida Everglades, to ancient deposits formed during Pleistocene marine transgressions of the South Florida platform. Through textural and geochemical analyses, this project tracks the deposition and early diagenesis of microbial carbonates and their associated organic content as an analogue study applicable to ancient microbialites. In the modern, fine-grained low-Mg calcite crystals are precipitated and buried on a low-lying coastal plain (Paurotis Pond). Geochemical parameters were measured to provide baseline characterization of the deposition and early diagenesis of the freshwater muds. Stable isotopic values of the precipitated muds range from d18O of -1.5 to -2.5‰ and d13C 0.5 to -0.5‰, showing slight increases with depth. This change is likely due to waters from the underlying Pleistocene bedrock, diffusing up and mixing with the surface water. Total organic carbon (TOC) is depleted with depth from 10.4 to 4.2% as a result of the degradation of highly labile organic matter (heavier in d13Corg), leaving the resulting pool of organics increasingly negative (-23‰ to -26‰ in the modern). Pleistocene freshwater limestones were observed in core borings ~20 km north of Paurotis Pond. These units closely resemble the modern muds, and allow us to assess the preservation potential of original microbial, geochemical, and textural signatures. Diagenesis has resulted in lighter d13C values relative to the adjacent altered marine units, as well as their modern equivalent. Organics in the Pleistocene are also characterized by more negative C and O isotopic compositions from interpreted original values, and TOC was reduced to <0.1%. Results suggest that both carbonate and organic fractions are pervasively altered during the burial process, and may not be effective paleoclimate indicators as some research suggests. However, these components may still provide some evidence of a microbial origin, in both textural components as well as the remaining d13Corg values are typically more negative than non-microbial organics.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85573", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85574" } }
{"authors":"Anne Marie Stoner::Texas Tech University--Katharine Hayhoe::Texas Tech University--Jennifer Jacobs::Univ New Hampshire--", "title":"PA13A-2182: Joint Knowledge Generation Between Climate Science and Infrastructure Engineering", "abstract":"Over the past decade the engineering community has become increasingly aware of the need to incorporate climate projections into the planning and design of sensitive infrastructure. However, this is a task that is easier said than done. This presentation will discuss some of the successes and hurdles experiences through the past year, from a climate scientist’s perspective, working with engineers in infrastructure research and applied engineering through the Infrastructure & Climate Network (ICNet). Engineers rely on strict building codes and ordinances, and can be the subject of lawsuits if those codes are not followed. Matters are further complicated by the uncertainty inherent to climate projections, which include short-term natural variability, as well as the influence of scientific uncertainty and even human behavior on the rate and magnitude of change. Climate scientists typically address uncertainty by creating projections based on multiple models following different future scenarios. This uncertainty is difficult to incorporate into engineering projects, however, due to the fact that they cannot build two different bridges, one allowing for a lower amount of change, and another for a higher. More often than not there is a considerable difference between the costs of building two such bridges, which means that available funds often are the deciding factor. Discussions of climate science are often well received with engineers who work in the research area of infrastructure; going a step further, however, and implementing it in applied engineering projects can be challenging. This presentation will discuss some of the challenges and opportunities inherent to collaborations between climate scientists and transportation engineers, drawing from a range of studies including truck weight restrictions on roads during the spring thaw, and bridge deck performance due to environmental forcings.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85574", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85575" } }
{"authors":"Andrew Marsh::University of California Santa Cruz--David Smith::University of California Santa Cruz--Lindsay Glesener::University of California Berkeley--Iain Hannah::University of Glasgow--Sam Krucker::University of California Berkeley--Hugh Hudson::University of California Berkeley--Brian Grefenstette::California Institute of Technology--Kristin Madsen::California Institute of Technology--Amir Caspi::Southwest Research Institute Boulder--", "title":"SH13B-2441: The NuSTAR Sensitivity to Quiet-Sun Transient Events", "abstract":"We present the NuSTAR sensitivity to quiet Sun (QS) transient events, which have been seen in wavelengths from UV to soft X-rays. Although not optimized for solar observations, NuSTAR can observe X-ray emission from the Sun with unprecedented sensitivity in the hard X-ray range; this is crucial for detecting individual events in the quiet corona. While NuSTAR has not yet detected any such events, we use QS data from the 01-November-2014 observations (at a GOES-level ~B4) to determine what types of events we could have detected. In particular, we place lower limits on the detectable flare emission measure for isothermal temperatures between 2 – 10 MK. While our sensitivity to date has been limited by noise due to active regions outside the field of view, these limits are still >2 orders of magnitude below the RHESSI detection limits at corresponding temperatures. We expect to increase our sensitivity by at least an order of magnitude with future observations at lower solar flux levels and with fewer active regions on the disk.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85575", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85576" } }
{"authors":"Hyun-Moo Cho::KIGAM Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources--Il-Young Che::KIGAM Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources--Geunyoung Kim::KIGAM--", "title":"S53A-2762: The Characterization of Microearthquakes in Offshore Area of Northeastern South Korea from Multidisciplinary Data Set", "abstract":"A number of small earthquakes in offshore Gangneung-Sokcho-Goseong area of northeastern South Korea has been identified and the hypocenters of these events are relocated by double-difference algorithm using multidisciplinary data set. Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources (KIGAM) lists 845 events for the period Jan. 2010 – Jun. 2015 with local magnitude up to 3.3. Peer review shows that the offshore events can be grouped into a number of small clusters, whereas onshore events are relatively few and unevenly distributed. It appears to have little relationship between the location of offshore event clusters and the direction of main onshore faults running NNE – SSW. In this study, we focus on the small events occurred in the area of N37°45´-38°35´ and E128°30´ – 129°20´. The Korea Integrated Seismic System (KISS) network operated by KIGAM and 5 temporary stations with Guralp CMG-40T short-period seismometers placed along the east coast of South Korea record the seismic energy generated from small events. The 137 events recorded from May to October 2014, ranging in local magnitude from 0.4 to 2.3, are already relocated using 1849 direct P-wave traveltimes identified from 29 stations. Relocation produced two major clusters in offshore Goseong (cluster 1) and Yangyang (cluster 2) province. The waveforms of relocated events in cluster 1 and 2 are similar to those from explosion in waters rather than earthquake, and spectrum analysis shows energy concentration on low frequencies below 10 Hz. We are combining the multidisciplinary data set from land based broadband and short-period seismometers, Guralp OBS system deployed in July this year, accelerometer and hydrophone array mounted on the offshore platforms of the underwater seismic observatory in the north of the study area. The integration of seismic and hydro-acoustic data in offshore supplements uneven azimuthal coverage and gives improved characterization of offshore seismic activity.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85576", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85577" } }
{"authors":"Xiaoqin Wu::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Sindhu Jagadamma::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Andrew Lancaster::University of Georgia--Michael Adams::University of Georgia--Terry Hazen::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Nicholas Justice::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Romy Chakraborty::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--", "title":"B23C-0619: Microbial Interactions with Natural Organic Matter Extracted from the Oak Ridge FRC", "abstract":"Natural organic matter (NOM) is central to microbial food webs; however, little is known about the interplay between the physical and chemical characteristics of NOM and its turnover by microbial communities based upon biotic and abiotic parameters (e.g., biogenic precursors, redox state, bioavailability). Microbial activity changes the structures and properties that influence further bioavailability of NOM. To date, our understanding of these interactions is insufficient, and indigenous microbial activities that regulate NOM turnover are poorly resolved. It is critical to identify NOM characteristics to the structure and composition of microbial communities and to the metabolic potential of that community. Towards that end, sediment samples collected from the background area well FW305 (Oak Ridge Field Research Center, Oak Ridge, TN) were tested for NOM extraction methods that used three mild solvents, e.g., phosphate buffered saline (PBS), pyrophosphate, and MilliQ-water. MilliQ-water was finally chosen for extracting sediment samples via shaking and sonication. Groundwater from well FW301 was used as an inoculum to which the extracted NOM was added as carbon sources to feed native microbes. To identify the specific functional groups of extracted NOM that are bioavailable to indigenous microbes, several techniques, including FTIR, LC-MS, EEM, were applied to characterize the extracted NOM as well as the transformed NOM metabolites. 16S rDNA amplicon sequencing was also performed to identify the specific microbial diversity that was enriched and microbial isolates that preferentially grew with these NOM was also cultivated in the lab for future detailed studies.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85577", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85578" } }
{"authors":"Lucy Yin::California Institute of Technology--Thomas Heaton::California Institute of Technology--", "title":"S22B-08: Incorporate Seismic Activity Prior Information to Earthquake Early Warning through Bayesian Framework", "abstract":"Most of the current Earthquake Early Warning technologies focus on time analysis of wave amplitudes. There are two major drawbacks of these waveform-based techniques: tradeoffs between magnitude and distance estimation for the onsite algorithms, and time latency in alerts for the network algorithms. We are proposing an alternative EEW algorithm that combines the efficiency of onsite algorithms and accuracy of network algorithms, which provides the fastest alert at the moment of station trigger. It is achieved by using observed seismicity from the network as prior information to predict short-term seismic hazards, and then use trigger information from the onsite station as likelihood information to estimate earthquake probability and hypocenter location. This algorithm has numbers of advantages. First, due to the independent data source of this algorithm, results can be directly multiplied to the results of other algorithms such as GPS and waveform data under Bayesian framework to achieve posterior probability function. Second, it is especially beneficial for regions with sparsely distributed station density where it takes longer time for the seismic signals to arrive at the near stations. Lastly, it can significantly speed up warning process during aftershock sequence, swarm earthquake sequence, and mainshocks that had foreshocks. The concept can be further extended to network-based algorithms to incorporate arrived waveform data at more stations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85578", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85579" } }
{"authors":"Solomon Seyoum Demissie::University of California Los Angeles--Mekonnen Gebremichael::University of California Los Angeles--Thomas Hopson::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Emily Riddle::National Center for Atmospheric Research--William W-G Yeh::University of California Los Angeles--", "title":"H51T-06: Towards Optimization of Reservoir Operations for Hydropower Production in East Africa: Application of Seasonal Climate Forecasts and Remote Sensing Products", "abstract":"Hydroelectric generation and interconnections are the major priority areas of infrastructure development in Africa. A number of hydropower projects are currently being developed in East Africa in order to meet the energy demands of the fast growing economy in sustainable and climate-resilient manner. However, the performance efficiency of existing hydropower systems in Africa is much lower (about 30% in some cases) than their design capacity. This study proposes a decision support system (DSS) that integrates climate forecasts and remote sensing products into modeling and optimization of the hydropower systems in order to achieve reliable reservoir operations and enhance hydropower production efficiency. The DSS has three main components; climate system, hydrologic and water resources system, and optimization system. The climate system comprises of tools and interfaces for accessing, customizing and integrating climate forecasts and remote sensing data. The North America Multi-Model Ensemble (NMME) seasonal retrospective forecasts for the East Africa Power Pool (EAPP) region are compared with the TRMM rainfall estimates and the CPC unified gauged rainfall data. The errors of the NMME seasonal forecasts have portrayed significant spatial and temporal variability in the EAPP region. The root mean square errors of the seasonal forecasts are relatively higher for wetter locations and months. However, the skills of the NMME seasonal forecasts are not significantly depreciating with lead time for the study region. The seasonal forecast errors vary from one model to another. Here, we present the skills of NMME seasonal forecasts, the physical factors and mechanisms that affect the skills. In addition, we discuss our methodology that derives the best seasonal forecasts for the study region from the NMME seasonal forecasts, and show how the climate forecast errors propagate through hydrologic models into hydrological forecasting.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85579", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85580" } }
{"authors":"Matthew Goslin::University of Oregon--Patricia McDowell::University of Oregon--", "title":"EP41E-06: A native sedge, Carex nudata, as facilitator of restoration goals: effects on channel morphology and planform in the Middle Fork John Day River", "abstract":"In the Middle Fork of the John Day River, the native riparian sedge, Carex nudata, has exploded across the landscape following the removal of cattle grazing in the late 1990s. C. nudata now forms fringes along the edges of the low flow channel and grows as islands within the river. C. nudata appears to be altering channel morphology and planform in ways that may facilitate key restoration goals. I have employed multiple methods to investigate changes in channel morphology and planform in association with C. nudata: aerial imagery analysis, repeated topographic surveys, and erosion pins in cut banks with C. nudata fringes. Preliminary results suggest that C. nudata stabilizes the edges of the low flow channel, but cut banks behind C. nudata fringes continue to erode such that the bankflow width and channel boundaries continue to move. Aerial imagery analysis indicates that current C. nudata islands are often the result of C. nudata fringes becoming “detached” from banks rather than from initial establishment of plants in midchannel positions. Topographic surveys suggest scouring upstream of C. nudata islands and along the edges of C. nudata fringes. We propose a conceptual model in which multiple alternative pathways of river development may be possible after the establishment of C. nudata, depending on the antecedent conditions where it becomes established (e.g. bank composition, river curvature). Alternative pathways include: 1) bank stabilization, channel narrowing and deepening; 2) formation of a compound channel with a side channel that is activated at high flows; 3) the formation of islands within the channel. The potential for multiple pathways of development after C. nudata establishment may lead to complex patterns of river morphology and planform consistent with habitat complexity goals of river restoration.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85580", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85581" } }
{"authors":"Clarence Korendyke::US Naval Research Laboratory--Angelos Vourlidas::Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory--Paulett Liewer::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--James Cutler::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Russell Howard::Naval Research Laboratory--Simon Plunkett::US Naval Research Laboratory--Arnaud Thernisien::Naval Research Lab--", "title":"EP53C-1045: MiniCOR: A miniature coronagraph for an interplanetary CUBESAT", "abstract":"Coronagraphs occupy a unique place in Heliophysics, critical to both NAA and NOAA programs. They are the primary means for the study of the extended solar coorna and its short/long term activity. In addition coronagraphs are the only instrument that can image coronal mass ejections (CMEs) leaving the Sun and provide ciritical information for space weather forecasting. We descirbe a low cost miniaturzied CubeSat coronagraph, MiniCOR, designed to operate in deep space which will returndata with higher cadence and sensitivity than that from the SOHO/LASCO coronagraphs. MiniCOR is a six unit (6U) science craft with a tightly integrated, single instrument interplanetary flight system optiized for science. MiniCOR fully exploits recent technology advance in CubeSat technology and active pixel sensors. With a factor of 2.9 improvement in light gathering power over SOHO and quasi-continuous data collection, MiniCOR can observe the slow solar wind, CMEs and shocks with sufficient signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) to open new windows on our understanding of the inner Heliosphere. An operating Minic'OR would prvide coornagraphic observations in support of the upcoming Solar Probe Plus (SPP) and Solar Orbiter (SO) missions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85581", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85582" } }
{"authors":"JinSoo Park::Organization Not Listed--Joonyoung Ahn::NIER National Institute of Environmental Research--Minyoung Seong::NIER National Institute of Environmental Research--Haeun Jeon::NIER National Institute of Environmental Research--Sojung Yoo::NIER National Institute of Environmental Research--Hyunjae Kim::NIER National Institute of Environmental Research--Choi Soo::NIER National Institute of Environmental Research--Youdeog Hong::NIER National Institute of Environmental Research--Jihyung Hong::NIER National Institute of Environmental Research--", "title":"A11G-0144: Chemical Composition Characteristics of Particulate Matter in Seoul Metropolitan Area during the Pre-campaign Period of KORUS-AQ", "abstract":"While the current concentration of particulate matter (PM10) in the metropolitan areas of South Korea shows a continuous decreasing tendency, the high concentration episodes have reportedly been increasing. The Ministry of Environment of Korea plans to promote the Korea-US Air Quality Campaign (hereinafter referred to as KORUS-AQ) in cooperation with NASA, to identify the drivers of particulate matter and ozone and improve the accuracy of forecasting models. The purpose of this research is to identify the chemical composition characteristics of particulate matters (PM10 and PM2.5) by analyzing the filters collected at the Seoul intensive monitoring site during the pre-campaign period. From May 18 through June 19 in 2015, we collected the PM10 and PM2.5 samples from 10 am to 9 am the next day every day for 23 hours by using the low-volume air sampler at KIST, located in Hawolgok-dong, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul, Korea, to analyse fine dust concentration and ionic, carbonaceous, and elemental components. During the research period, the PM10 and PM2.5 mass concentrations were within 21.1 - 78.5 ug/m3 and 12.0 - 56.0 ug/m3, respectively and the average PM10 and PM2.5 mass concentrations were 42.5 ug/m3 and 24.6 ug/m3, respectively. In 24.6 ug/m3 of the average PM2.5 mass concentration, anions were 37.1 %( 9.7 ug/m3) and cations were 13.9%( 3.6 ug/m3), indicating that 51% of the PM2.5 components were ions. In the ionic components of PM2.5, sulfate showed the highest concentration (7.03 ug/m3), followed by nitrate (2.61 ug/m3), chloride (0.08 ug/m3), ammonium (3.14 mu/m3), sodium (0.17 ug/m3), kalium (0.15 ug/m3), calcium (0.11 ug/m3), and magnesium (0.01 ug/m3). The average concentrations of carbonaceous components of PM2.5 were 4.2 ug/m3 (18.7 %) for organic carbon (OC) and 2.2 ug /m3 (9.8 %) for inorganic carbon (EC), indicating that PM2.5 had total 6.4 ug/m3 (28.5 %) of carbon. As a result of the analysis on elemental components, it was shown that PM2.5 had 1.61 ug/m3(6.9 %) of crustal materials and 0.08 ug/m3 (0.4 %) of trace metals that accounted for 7.3%. PM10 was high in crustal materials, as it had 7.40 ug/m3(18.0 %) of crustal materials and 0.15 ug/m3 (0.4 %) of trace metals that accounted for 18.4%. Compared to PM2.5, PM10 showed high concentrations of K, Ca, Ti, Fe, and Zn that are the main components of fugitive dusts and crust materials.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85582", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85583" } }
{"authors":"Genti Toyokuni::Tohoku University--Hiroshi Takenaka::Okayama University--Masaki Kanao::NIPR National Institute of Polar Research--Seiji Tsuboi::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--Yoko Tono::JAMSTEC--", "title":"S23B-2705: Seismic waveform modelings for estimating influence of the ice sheet on observed seismograms", "abstract":"In 2009, the multinational GreenLand Ice Sheet monitoring Network (GLISN) was initiated to monitor seismic events in and around the Greenland. Japan has been sending a field team to Greenland each year since 2011, to construct and maintain the GLISN stations especially on ice. However, the thick and heterogeneous Greenland ice sheet is considered to cause various kinds of distortion on seismic waveforms observed at these ice stations. We have been working for construction of a numerical technique, which can calculate accurate regional seismic wavefields with small computational requirements. In this presentation, we calculate elastic wave propagation up to 2 Hz for several structural models of the Greenland ice sheet radiated from a seismic source with various depths and mechanisms. Our computations for a realistic ice sheet model, the near-surface seismic source produced a very characteristic wave train with the group velocity smaller than the S-wavespeed in the ice, which is considered as an ice-sheet guided S wave, developed by a superposition of post-critical reflections between the free surface and the ice bed. We named this wave ` Le`  on the analogy of the Lg wave, a crustally guided S wave (` e`  comes from the German word ` Eisdecke` , meaning the ice sheet). Furthermore, computation for a deeper seismic source resulted in reinforcement of the crustal Sg-coda wave with a group velocity range of ~3.1-2.6 km/s, which well explains the characteristic waveform observed on the Greenland ice sheet. In the presentation, we will show several results for the Antarctic ice sheet.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85583", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85585" } }
{"authors":"Nathan Williams::Arizona State University--Manoochehr Shirzaei::Arizona State University--James Bell::Arizona State University--Thomas Watters::Smithsonian Inst--", "title":"P33C-2141: Inverse Modeling of Wrinkle Ridge Structures on the Moon and Mars", "abstract":"Sinuous wrinkle ridges are common tectonic landforms on Mars and in lunar mare basins. They have up to hundreds of meters of relief on the Moon and up to over a kilometer of relief on Mars, and are interpreted as folded basalt layers overlying thrust faults. They consist of a narrow, asymmetric ridge atop a broad arch and sometimes occur radial to or concentric with the centers of some mass concentrations (mascons). Wrinkle ridges with these patterns have previously been associated with mascons – dense concentrations of mass identified by positive gravity anomalies. Loading of the crust by mascons causes flexure and subsidence to form wrinkle ridges. However, some basins on the Moon including western Mare Frigoris are not associated with mascons, yet wrinkle ridges deform the mare. On Mars, gravity data is coarser, but wrinkle ridges are sometimes observed in terrains that are not expected to have a significant mascon. The origin of compressional stresses in non-mascon environments remains an outstanding question. A key step to better understanding the occurrence of wrinkle ridges in non-mascon environments is characterizing the behavior of the underlying faults. We expand upon methods used in Williams N. R. et al. [2013] and apply fault dislocation modeling to estimate geometries and displacements for selected wrinkle ridge faults. On the Moon, we use a digital terrain model (DTM) derived from Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera (LROC) Narrow Angle Camera (NAC) stereo images to constrain fault models. On Mars, we use a DTM derived from High Resolution Stereo Camera (HRSC) stereo images. Different from our previous work, we apply inverse methods on a triangular mesh [Shirzaei & Bürgmann, 2013] to model ridge relief for curved fault geometries. Preliminary results suggest maximum depths of faulting within the upper few km and shallow (<40°) dip angles. These preliminary modeled values are comparable to previous estimates for other lunar and martian wrinkle ridges, and suggest this faulting is likely confined to within the upper crust.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85585", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85586" } }
{"authors":"John Aragon::Yale University--Maureen Long::Yale University--Margaret Benoit::College of New Jersey--Eric Kirby::Oregon State University--Scott King::Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University--", "title":"DI21A-2594: SKS splitting beneath the MAGIC FlexArray experiment", "abstract":"The Mid-Atlantic Geophysical Integrative Collaboration (MAGIC) is an EarthScope and GeoPRISMS-funded project that involves a collaborative effort among seismologists, geodynamicists, and geomorphologists to understand the relationships among surface processes, crustal and lithospheric structure, and deep mantle flow beneath eastern North America. The eastern passive continental margin has been modified by multiple episodes of orogenesis and rifting through several cycles of supercontinent assembly and breakup over the past 1.3 billion years of Earth history. The MAGIC Flexible Array broadband seismic deployment began in October 2013, with the main phase of the deployment taking place in October 2014. As of summer 2015 the experiment had 27 stations running; the deployment will demobilize in October 2016. We have investigated splitting of SKS phases measured at MAGIC stations during the early stages of the deployment. As illustrated by this presentation, stations located in the Appalachian Mountains, present fast splitting directions parallel to the strike of the Appalachian range, with delay times of approximately 1 sec. At stations to the east and west of the high topography, we find more complicated splitting patterns, with fast directions that vary over short length scales and a large number of null SKS arrivals over a range of backazimuths. These observations suggest a significant contribution to SKS splitting from anisotropy in the lithospheric upper mantle in our study region.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85586", "section":"Earth's Deep Interior"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85587" } }
{"authors":"Julia Klath::University of California Santa Barbara--Edward Keller::University of California Santa Barbara--", "title":"NH41B-1827: Landslides: Geomorphology and Sea Cliff Hazard Potential, Santa Barbara – Isla Vista, California J.F. Klath and E.A. Keller", "abstract":"Coastal areas are often characterized by high population densities in an ever changing, dynamic environment. The world’s coasts are often dominated by steeply sloping sea cliffs, the morphology of which reflects rock type, wave erosion, and surface erosion, as well as human activities such changing vegetation, urban runoff, and construction of coastal defenses. The Santa Barbara and Goleta area, with over 17 km of sea cliffs and beaches, extends from Santa Barbara Point west to the hamlet of Isla Vista. A deeper understanding of the local geology and the physical processes generating slope failure and, thus, landward cliff retreat is important for general public safety, as well as future development and planning. Our research objective includes assessment of landslide hazard potential through investigation of previous landslides and how these events relate to various physical variables and characteristics within the surrounding bedrock. How does landslide frequency, volume, and type relate to varying local bedrock and structure? Two geologic formations dominate the sea cliffs of the Santa Barbara area: Monterey shale (upper, middle, and lower) and Monterey Sisquoc shale. Geology varies from hard cemented shale and diatomaceous, low specific gravity shale to compaction shale. Variations in landslide characteristics are linked closely to the geology of a specific site that affects how easily rock units are weathered and eroded by wave erosion, naturally occurring oil and water seeps, burnt shale events, and landslide type and frequency on steeply dipped bedding planes/daylighting beds. Naturally occurring features linked to human processes often weaken bedrock and, thus, increase the likelihood of landslides. We categorize landslide frequency, type, and triggers; location of beach access, drainage pipes, and water; and oil and tar seeps in order to develop suggestions to minimize landslide potential. Lastly, using previously published erosion cliff retreat rates and sea level rise estimates, a map displaying likely position of the coastline by 2100 will be created. This information will be useful to the county of Santa Barbara, California when considering future development and hazard mitigation plans.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85587", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85588" } }
{"authors":"Mikhail Kreslavsky::University of California Santa Cruz--James Head::Brown University--", "title":"P53B-2126: The Steepest Slopes on the Moon: Gradual Degradation and Instant Removal by Basin-Forming Impacts", "abstract":"We calculated topographic gradients over the surface of the Moon at a 25 m baseline using data obtained by the Lunar Orbiter Laser Altimeter (LOLA) instrument onboard the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) spacecraft. The derived slope-frequency distribution revealed a steep roll-over for slopes close to the angle of repose. Slopes significantly steeper than the angle of repose are almost absent on the Moon due to (1) the general absence of cohesion/strength of the fractured and fragmented megaregolith of the lunar highlands, and (2) the absence of steep-slope producing geological processes in the recent geological past. The majority of slopes steeper than 32 - 35 degrees are associated with relatively young large impact craters. Very rare extremely steep (> 45 degrees) slopes are exclusively associated with large Copernican-age craters. Craters of Early Imbrian age and older are devoid of slopes steeper than ~35 degrees. We interpret these observations in the following way. Every basin-forming impact removes steep slopes by global seismic shaking causing slope collapse. The latest such impact formed Orientale basin and instantly removed all preexisting slopes steeper than ~35 degrees. This makes steep slopes a good global stratigraphic marker at Early/Late Imbrian boundary. After the Orientale impact, craters lose their steepest slopes progressively with time. This makes crater wall steepness an independent proxy for crater age. The global spatial distribution of the proportion of the steepest slopes correlates moderately well with the predicted spatial distribution of impact rate: low latitudes and the leading hemisphere have a higher steep slope proportion than high latitudes and the trailing hemisphere. However, the southern farside has a significant paucity of steep slopes, which remains unexplained. Acknowledgement: Data processing was performed at MIIGAiK by MK and supported by Russian Science Foundation, project 14-22-00197.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85588", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85589" } }
{"authors":"Takanori Ojima::Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute University of Tokyo--", "title":"T21E-2880: Applications for evaluation of physical properties - An example of siliceous rock permeability -", "abstract":"ODP Leg. 186, two sites (Site 1150 and Site 1151) were drilled on the continental slope of the deep-sea forearc basin of northern Japan. Diatomaceous sediments were recovered Site 1150 and Site 1151, and the depth of each site is 1181.60 mbsf and 1113.60 mbsf, respectively. This area is under the influence of the Oyashio current and is one of the highly bio-productive regions of the North Pacific Ocean (Motoyama et al., 2004). The combination of high productivity and active tectonic deformation that often caused high rate accumulating of fossil and organic rich sediments. Likewise, IODP Exp. 341 was implemented on off South Alaska. Pelagic and MTD ‘s layer were recognized with IRD(Ice Rafted Debris). In Tohoku, The onboard results of porosity measurements show high value (50-70 %) down to 1000 mbsf, and obviously higher than nearby subduction trench, Nankai Trough (Taylor and Fisher, 1993). There is a possibility that diatomaceous shell keep a frame structure from effective stress and load pressure. On another drilling site result, DSDP Leg. 19 located 60 km to the north of ODP sites, was reported high value of porosity, but recognized only shallow range (>500 mbsf) (Shephard and Bryant, 1980). Also, South Alaska sediments show high sedimentation rate and cyclic MTD's Layer. Permeability was lower than Tohoku sediments in spite of upper depth. We focused on the relationships between physical property, microstructure, and logging data at deep range(-1000 mbsf). Logging data were collected using wireline logging (Sacks and Suyehiro, 2003; IODP Prel. Rept., 341., 2014). Based on these results, it is expected that microstructure and logging can be integrated into a general model of core-log correlation. In this presentation, We show results of microstructure using SEM, measured physical properties, and wireline logging data, respectively.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85589", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85590" } }
{"authors":"Loren Albert::University of Arizona--Pilar Vergeli::University of Arizona--Giordane Martins::National Institute for Amazon Research (INPA)--Scott Saleska::University of Arizona--Travis Huxman::University of California, Irvine--", "title":"B21K-04: Interpreting chlorophyll fluorescence signals: the effects of leaf age", "abstract":"Remote sensing of sun-induced chlorophyll fluorescence (SIF) promises robust estimation of carbon uptake across landscapes, as studies of plant physiology have shown that fluorescence emission is directly linked to photosynthesis at the leaf level. Yet most leaf-level studies demonstrating the link between chlorophyll fluorescence and photosynthesis have studied leaves in their prime: leaves that recently finished expansion and have yet to senesce. By contrast, remote sensing of landscapes involves observing leaves of different ages. For example, broadleaf deciduous forests and annual plant communities in temperate regions have leaves that develop and then senesce over the course of a growing season. In this experiment, we explored how leaf age and moisture availability affect steady-state fluoresence (Fs) at the leaf level. We simultaneously measured net photosynthesis (Anet) and Fs for leaves of known ages on greenhouse-grown dwarf Helianthus Annuus (sunflowers) from two watering treatments. To monitor plant water status, we measured pre-dawn water potential, and, for a subset of leaves, osmotic potential. Fully expanded or near-fully expanded leaves (~8 to ~23 days old) had higher Anet at saturating light than young, expanding leaves (less than 8 days old) or old leaves nearing senescence (>23 days old). We found a positive relationship between Fs and Anet, suggesting that the link between fluorescence emission and photosynthesis is robust across leaves of different ages. However, leaf age had marked effects on the light response curve of photosynthesis and fluorescence metrics. These results suggest that leaf age distribution, and changes in leaf age distribution due to phenology, should be considered when interpreting SIF at the landscape level.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85590", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85591" } }
{"authors":"Mathieu Dellinger::University of Southern California--A. Joshua West::University of Southern California--Jess Adkins::California Institute of Technology--Guillaume Paris::CalTech Seismological Laboratory--Robert Eagle::University of California Los Angeles--Pedro Freitas::Instituto Português do Mar e da Atmosfera (IPMA)--Marie-Laure Bagard::Open University--Justin Ries::Northeastern University--Frank Corsetti::University of Southern California--Philip Pogge von Strandmann::University College London--Clemens Ullmann::University of Exeter--", "title":"PP52B-04: The Li isotope composition of modern biogenic carbonates", "abstract":"The lithium stable isotope composition (δ7Li) of sedimentary carbonates has great potential to unravel weathering rates and intensity in the past, with implications for understanding the carbon cycle over geologic time. However, so far very little is known about the potential influence of fractionation of the stable Li isotope composition of biogenic carbonates. Here, we investigate the δ7Li of various organisms (particularly mollusks, echinoderms and brachiopods) abundant in the Phanerozoic record, in order to understand which geologic archives might provide the best targets for reconstructing past seawater composition. The range of measured samples includes (i) modern calcite and aragonite shells from variable natural environments, (ii) shells from organisms grown under controlled conditions (temperature, salinity, pCO2), and (iii) fossil shells from a range of species collected from Miocene deposits. When possible, both the inner and outer layers of bivalves were micro-sampled to assess the intra-shell heterogeneity. For calcitic shells, the measured δ7Li of bivalve species range from +32 to +41‰ and is systematically enriched in the heavy isotope relative to seawater (31 ‰) and to inorganic calcite, which is characterized by Δ7Licalcite–seawater = −2 to −5‰ [1]. The Li isotope composition of aragonitic bivalves, ranging from +16 to +22‰, is slightly fractionated to both high and low δ7Li relative to inorganic aragonite. The largest intra-shell Li isotope variability is observed for mixed calcite-aragonite shells (more than 20‰) whereas in single mineralogy shells, intra-shell δ7Li variability is generally less than 3‰. Overall, these results suggest a strong influence of vital effects on Li isotopes during bio-calcification of bivalve shells. On the contrary, measured brachiopods systematically exhibit fractionation that is very similar to inorganic calcite, with a mean δ7Li of 27.0±1.5‰, suggesting that brachiopods may provide good targets for future work aiming to reconstruct the Li isotope composition seawater.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85591", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85592" } }
{"authors":"Lynn Yarmey::National Snow and Ice Data Center--", "title":"IN31C-1782: Designing for Change: Interoperability in a scaling and adapting environment", "abstract":"The Earth Science cyberinfrastructure landscape is constantly changing. Technologies advance and technical implementations are refined or replaced. Data types, volumes, packaging, and use cases evolve. Scientific requirements emerge and mature. Standards shift while systems scale and adapt. In this complex and dynamic environment, interoperability remains a critical component of successful cyberinfrastructure. Through the resource- and priority-driven iterations on systems, interfaces, and content, questions fundamental to stable and useful Earth Science cyberinfrastructure arise. For instance, how are sociotechnical changes planned, tracked, and communicated? How should operational stability balance against ‘new and shiny’? How can ongoing maintenance and mitigation of technical debt be managed in an often short-term resource environment?  The Arctic Data Explorer is a metadata brokering application developed to enable discovery of international, interdisciplinary Arctic data across distributed repositories. Completely dependent on interoperable third party systems, the Arctic Data Explorer publicly launched in 2013 with an original 3000+ data records from four Arctic repositories. Since then the search has scaled to 25,000+ data records from thirteen repositories at the time of writing. In the final months of original project funding, priorities shift to lean operations with a strategic eye on the future. Here we present lessons learned from four years of Arctic Data Explorer design, development, communication, and maintenance work along with remaining questions and potential directions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85592", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85593" } }
{"authors":"Douglas Brugger::University of Montana--Marco Maneta::University of Montana--", "title":"H13J-1724: A socio-hydrologic model of coupled water-agriculture dynamics with emphasis on farm size.", "abstract":"Agricultural land cover dynamics in the U.S. are dominated by two trends: 1) total agricultural land is decreasing and 2) average farm size is increasing. These trends have important implications for the future of water resources because 1) growing more food on less land is due in large part to increased groundwater withdrawal and 2) larger farms can better afford both more efficient irrigation and more groundwater access. However, these large-scale trends are due to individual farm operators responding to many factors including climate, economics, and policy. It is therefore difficult to incorporate the trends into watershed-scale hydrologic models. Traditional scenario-based approaches are valuable for many applications, but there is typically no feedback between the hydrologic model and the agricultural dynamics and so limited insight is gained into the how agriculture co-evolves with water resources. We present a socio-hydrologic model that couples simplified hydrologic and agricultural economic dynamics, accounting for many factors that depend on farm size such as irrigation efficiency and returns to scale. We introduce an “economic memory” (EM) state variable that is driven by agricultural revenue and affects whether farms are sold when land market values exceed expected returns from agriculture. The model uses a Generalized Mixture Model of Gaussians to approximate the distribution of farm sizes in a study area, effectively lumping farms into “small,” “medium,” and “large” groups that have independent parameterizations. We apply the model in a semi-arid watershed in the upper Columbia River Basin, calibrating to data on streamflow, total agricultural land cover, and farm size distribution. The model is used to investigate the sensitivity of the coupled system to various hydrologic and economic scenarios such as increasing market value of land, reduced surface water availability, and increased irrigation efficiency in small farms.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85593", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85594" } }
{"authors":"Ann Dunlea::Boston University--Richard Murray::Boston University--Justine Sauvage::University of Rhode Island - GSO--Arthur Spivack::University of Rhode Island - GSO--Robert Harris::Oregon State University--Steven D'Hondt::University of Rhode Island--John Higgins::Princeton University--", "title":"PP43A-2258: Dust, Volcanic Ash, and the Evolution of the South Pacific Gyre through the Cenozoic", "abstract":"Dust and volcanic ash play a critical role in past global climate by affecting cloud cover and ocean nutrients as well as responding to changes in tectonics, aridity, and wind. Because the eolian fluxes in the Southern Hemisphere are so low, subtle changes in the absolute flux of dust and volcanic ash may have a disproportionally large impact on climate. Our multi-site record of eolian dust and volcanic ash accumulation in pelagic clay of the South Pacific Gyre (SPG), gathered during IODP Expedition 329, shows that eolian fluxes varied by an order of magnitude over the Cenozoic and correlate with changes of tectonic processes and global climate. We analyzed the concentrations of 37 elements in 138 bulk pelagic clay samples from 6 sites drilled throughout the SPG. Using multivariate statistical modeling of the geochemical dataset (e.g. Q-mode factor analysis and multiple linear regression) and a cobalt-based age model, we quantified the mass accumulation rate (MAR) of 6 end-members that comprise the SPG pelagic clay: dust, rhyolite, altered basalt, Fe-Mn oxyhydroxides, excess Si, and apatite. Our record shows that Australian dust MAR begins at the Early Eocene Climatic Optimum ~50 Ma as global temperatures began to cool and Australia began to tectonically separate from Antarctica. The mid-Miocene has noticeably higher MAR of dust and ash at multiple sites. While a simultaneous increase in production is possible (i.e., more aridity and volcanic activity), the synchronicity may be more indicative of stronger winds in the Southern Hemisphere and increased material in the atmosphere during this time. Heavier Mg isotopes occur at Site U1366 in samples that are composed primarily of hydrothermal deposition, excess Si, and volcanic ash. The Mg isotopic enrichment suggests that these components have undergone alterations to form authigenic aluminosilicates.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85594", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85596" } }
{"authors":"Edward Kim::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--", "title":"H21H-1497: Spatial and Temporal Patterns of SMAP Brightness Temperatures for Use in Level 1 TB Characterization", "abstract":"1. Introduction The recent launch of NASA’s Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) mission [Entekhabi, et al] has opened the door to improved brightness temperature (TB) calibration of satellite L-band microwave radiometers, through the use of SMAP’s lower noise performance and better immunity to man-made interference (vs. ESA’s Soil Moisture Ocean Salinity (SMOS) mission [Kerr, et al]), better spatial resolution (vs. NASA’s Aquarius sea surface salinity mission [Le Vine, et al]), and cleaner antenna pattern (vs. SMOS). All three radiometers use/used large homogeneous places on Earth’s surface as calibration targets—parts of the ocean, Antarctica, and tropical forests. Despite the recent loss of Aquarius data, there is still hope for creating a longer-term L-band data set that spans the timeframe of all 3 missions.  2. Description of Analyses and Expected Results  In this paper, we analyze SMAP brightness temperature data to quantify the spatial and temporal characteristics of external target areas in the oceans, Antarctica, forests, and other areas. Existing analyses have examined these targets in terms of averages, standard deviations, and other basic statistics (for Aquarius & SMOS as well). This paper will approach the problem from a signal processing perspective. Coupled with the use of SMAP’s novel RFI-mitigated TBs, and the aforementioned lower noise and cleaner antenna pattern, it is expected that of the 3 L-band missions, SMAP should do the best job of characterizing such external targets. The resulting conclusions should be useful to extract the best possible TB calibration from all 3 missions, helping to inter-compare the TB from the 3 missions, and to eventually inter-calibrate the TBs into a single long-term dataset.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85596", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85597" } }
{"authors":"Javier Sanchez::University of Houston--Paul Mann::University of Houston--", "title":"T11E-2950: Late Cretaceous-recent tectonic assembly of diverse crustal blocks in Central America, the Nicaraguan Rise, the Colombian Basin and northern South America as seen on a 1600-km-long, geologic and structural transect", "abstract":"We have constructed a 1600-km-long transect from northern Honduras to northern Colombia that crosses northeastward-striking crustal blocks using a combination of offshore seismic data, gravity and magnetic data, well subsidence information, nearby outcrop information, and results from previous thermochronological, geochronological, geochemical and paleostress studies. The transect defines three major crustal and structural provinces: 1) Precambrian-Paleozoic, Chortis continental block whose northern edge is defined by the North America-Caribbean plate boundary. Events in this ~20-25-km-thick province include two major unconformities at the top of the Cretaceous and Eocene, associated southeast-dipping thrust faults related to collision of the Great Arc of the Caribbean (GAC) and Caribbean Large Igneous Province (CLIP) with the Chortis continental block. A third event is Eocene to recent subsidence and transtensional basins formed during the opening of the Cayman trough; 2) Late Cretaceous GAC and CLIP of oceanic arc and plateau origin, whose northern, deformed edge corresponds to the mapped Siuna belt of northern Nicaragua. This crustal province has a ~15-20-km-thick crust and is largely undeformed and extends across the Lower Nicaraguan Rise, Hess fault, to the southern limit of the Colombian basin where about 300 km of this province has been subducted beneath the accretionary wedge of the South Caribbean deformed belt of northwestern South America; and 3) Eocene to recent accretionary prism and intramontane basins on continental crust of northern South America, where Miocene accelerated exhumation and erosion of Paleogene and Cretaceous rocks reflect either shallow subduction of the CLIP or the Panama collisional event to the southwest.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85597", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85598" } }
{"authors":"Megumi Sugimoto::Kyushu University--", "title":"NH13B-1935: Lessons unlearned in Japan before 2011: Effects of the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami on a nuclear plant in India", "abstract":"The 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami killed around 220,000 people and startled the world. North of Chennai (Madras), the Indian plant nearly affected by tsunami in 2004. The local residents really did not get any warning in India. ` On December 26, the Madras Atomic Power Station looked like a desolate place with no power, no phones, no water, no security arrangement and no hindrance whatsoever for outsiders to enter any part of the plant,`  said S.P. Udaykumar of SACCER.  Nuclear issues hide behind such big tsunami damaged. Few media reported outside India. As for US, San Francisco Chronicle reported scientists had to rethink about nuclear power plants by the 2004 tsunami in 11th July 2005. Few tsunami scientsts did not pay attention to nucler power plants nearly affected by tsunami in US. On the other hand, US government noticed the Indian plant nearly affected in 2004. US Goverment supported nucler disaster management in several countries.  As for Japan, Japanese goverment mainly concentrated reconstrucation in affected areas and tsunami early warning system. I worked in Japanese embassy in Jakarta Indonesia at that time. I did not receive the information about the Indian plant nearly affected by tsunami and US supported nucler safety to the other coutries.  The 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami damaged society and nuclear power stations. The Fukushima Dai-ichi Nuclear Power Plant (FDNPP) accident resulted in the largest release of radioactive material since the 1986 Chernobyl accident. Why did not Japanese tsunami scientists learn from warning signs from the nuclear plant in India by the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami to the 2011 Fukushima accident? I would like to clarify the reason few tsunami scientist notice this point in my presentation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85598", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85599" } }
{"authors":"Beth Bartel::UNAVCO, Inc.--Donna Charlevoix::UNAVCO, Inc. Boulder--", "title":"ED34A-08: Outreach on a National Scale: The Critical Role of Facilities", "abstract":"Facilities provide infrastructure for science that would not be feasible at a single institution. Facilities are also a resource for development of outreach products and activities that reach a national audience of diverse stakeholders. UNAVCO manages the NSF geodetic facility GAGE (Geodesy Advancing Geosciences and Earthscope). Staff at UNAVCO with expertise in education, outreach, and communication translate the science and supporting infrastructure into materials consumable by a wide array of users including teachers, students, museum attendees, emergency managers, park interpreters, and members of the general public. UNAVCO has the ability to distribute materials to a national and international audience, thereby greatly increasing the impact of the science and increasing the value of the investment by the National Science Foundation. In 2014 and 2015, UNAVCO produced multiple print products focused on the Plate Boundary Observatory (PBO), the geodetic component of EarthScope. Products include a deck of playing cards featuring PBO GPS stations, a poster featuring GPS velocities of the Western United States, and another poster focused on GPS velocities in Alaska. We are distributing these products to a broad audience, including teachers, station permit holders, and community members. The Tectonics of the Western United States poster was distributed this year in the American Geosciences Institute Earth Science Week kit for teachers, reaching 16,000 educators around the country. These posters and the PBO playing cards (PBO-52) were distributed to more than 100 teachers through workshops led by UNAVCO, the EarthScope National Office, the Southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC), and more. Additionally, these cards serve as a way to engage landowners who host these scientific stations on their property. This presentation will address the strategies for creating nationally relevant materials and the tools used for dissemination of materials to a broad audience. We will outline the process of our planning strategy as well as share ways in which we evaluate impact of particular outreach products and the overall outreach program.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85599", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85600" } }
{"authors":"Kevin Uno::Lamont -Doherty Earth Observatory--Pratigya Polissar::Lamont -Doherty Earth Observatory--Kevin Jackson::Lafayette College--Peter deMenocal::Columbia University of New York Lamont -Doherty Earth Observatory--", "title":"PP23E-06: The Late Miocene Rise of C4 Vegetation in Eastern Africa Documented by Terrestrial Plant Waxes in Marine Cores", "abstract":"C4 plants are predominantly grasses and they account for ~20% of global net primary productivity, serve as important sources of food, and are the dominant plant type in non-forested tropical ecosystems. Yet the reasons behind their rise to such a globally significant component of the terrestrial biosphere within the last 10 million years are not well understood. In eastern Africa, the expansion of C4 grasslands led to long-term changes in faunal distributions and resulted in major dietary shifts in mammalian lineages. Potential mechanisms leading to the rise of C4 plants include a decrease in atmospheric CO2, ecosystem perturbations by fire or large herbivores, and increased aridity or seasonality of precipitation. Improvement of the temporal and spatial coverage of vegetation records in the Late Neogene of East Africa may help elucidate the mechanisms responsible for regional and global C4 grassland expansion. It will also improve our ability to assess the relationship between vegetation change and mammalian evolution. To evaluate the evolution of C4 grasslands in East Africa, we measured carbon isotope ratios of n-alkanes from four DSDP cores stretching from the Red Sea (19.1° N) to the Somali Basin (2.4° S) that range in age from ~24 Ma to 0.5 Ma. Carbon isotope data from Somali Basin sites 235 and 241 indicate the appearance of C4 vegetation by ca. 10 Ma, followed by a relatively steady increase through the late Pleistocene. Odd numbered n-alkane homologues (C29 ­to C35) exhibit up to a 10‰ increase in δ13C. We also established end member molecular distributions of n‑alkanes and tracked changes in their proportional contributions through time. Changes in molecular distribution are broadly synchronous with increases in carbon isotope ratios, suggesting that n-alkane distributions reflect changes in C3 and C4 vegetation types.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85600", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85601" } }
{"authors":"Recep Cakir::Washington State Department of Natural Resources--Timothy Walsh::WA State Dept of Natural Resources--Yuyang Zou::University of Florida WA State Dept of Natural Resources--Terran Gufler::WA State Dept of Natural Resources--David Norman::WA State Dept of Natural Resources--", "title":"NH13B-1936: Multi-hazard Non-regulatory Risk Maps for Resilient Coastal Communities of Washington State in Pacific Northwest Region of the United States", "abstract":"Washington Department of Natural Resources – Division of Geology and Earth Resources (WADNR-DGER) partnered with FEMA through the FEMA Cooperating Technical Partners (CTP) program to assess annualized losses from flood and other hazards and prepare supportive risk related data for FEMA’s coastal RiskMAP projects. We used HAZUS-MH analysis to assess losses from earthquake, flood and other potential hazards such as landslide and tsunami in the project areas; on shorelines of the Pacific Ocean and Puget Sound of Washington Grays Harbor, Pacific, Skagit, Whatcom, Island, Mason, Clallam, Jefferson and San Juan counties. The FEMA’s Hazus-MH tool was applied to estimate losses and damages for each building due to floods and earthquakes. User-defined facilities (UDF) inventory data were prepared and used for individual building damage estimations and updating general building stocks. Flood depth grids were used to determine which properties are most impacted by flooding. For example, the HAZUS-MH (flood model) run based on the 1% annual chance event (or 100 year flood) for Grays Harbor County, resulted in a total of $161 million in losses to buildings including residential, commercial properties, and other building and occupancy types. A likely M9 megathrust Cascadia earthquake scenario USGS-ShakeMap was used for the HAZUS-MH earthquake model. For example, the HAZUS-MH (earthquake model) run based on the Cascadia M9 earthquake for Grays Harbor County, resulted in a total of $1.15 billion in losses to building inventory. We produced GIS-based overlay maps of properties exposed to tsunami, landslide, and liquefaction hazards within the communities. This multi-hazard approach is an essential component to produce non-regulatory maps for FEMA’s RiskMAP project, and they help further improve local and regional mitigation efforts and emergency response plans, and overall resiliency plan of the communities in and around the coastal communities in western Washington.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85601", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85602" } }
{"authors":"William Lochridge::Idaho State University--Michael McCurry::Idaho State Univ--Ryan Goldsby::Idaho State University--", "title":"V31E-3067: Preliminary paragenetic interpretation of the Quaternary topaz rhyolite lava domes of the Blackfoot volcanic field, southeastern Idaho", "abstract":"The Quaternary topaz rhyolite lava domes of the bimodal, basalt-dominated Blackfoot volcanic field (BVF), SE Idaho occur in three clusters. We refer to these as the China Hat lava dome field (southernmost; ~ 57 ka), and the 1.4 to 1.5 Ma Sheep Island and White Mountain (northernmost) lava dome fields. The rhyolites and surrounding, more voluminous basalt lavas closely resemble coeval Quaternary rocks erupted to the north along the Eastern Snake River Plain segment of the Yellowstone-Snake River Plain volcanic track. However rhyolites in BVF are distinguished by having more evolved Sr- and Nd-isotopic ratios, as well as having phenocryst assemblages that includes hydrous phases (biotite and hornblende), thorite, and vapor-phase topaz. This study seeks to improve our understanding of the unique conditions of magma evolution that led to these differences. We focus on textural features of major and accessory phenocrysts as a basis for inferring paragenesis for rhyolites from the China Hat lava dome field. Preliminary work indicates that there are three sequentially formed populations of textures among magmatic phases: 1. population of anhedral quartz and plagioclase; 2. population of euhedral grains that includes quartz, sandine, plagioclase, biotite, hornblende, Fe-Ti oxides, zircon and apatite; 3. boxy cellular (skeletal?) sanidine and quartz. We speculate that the first population are resorbed antecrysts, the second formed prior to eruption as autocrysts (at or near equilibrium?), and the third formed soon before or during eruption.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85602", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85603" } }
{"authors":"Ben Sparrow::University of Adelaide--Michael Schaefer::CSIRO Land and Water Canberra--Peter Scarth::Department of Science Information Technology Innovation and the Arts--Stuart Phinn::University of Queensland--Rebekah Christensen::University of Queensland--Andrew Lowe::University of Adelaide--Sally O'Neill::University of Adelaide--Nikki Thurgate::University of Adelaide--Dominic Wundke::University of Adelaide--", "title":"B51H-0533: REMOTELY SENSED INFORMATION AND FIELD DATA ARE BOTH ESSENTIAL TO ASSESS BIODIVERSITY CONDITION!", "abstract":"Over the past year the TERN Ausplots facility has hosted a process to determine the definition of Biodiversity Condition in an Australian Continental Context, and conducted a wide collaborative process to determine which environmental attributes are required to be measures to accurately inform on biodiversity condition. A major output from this work was the acknowledgement that good quality data from both remotely sensed sources and good quality field collected data are both essential to provide the best information possible on biodiversity condition. This poster details some background to the project, the assesment of which attributes to measure, and if the are sources primarily from field based or remotely sensed measures. It then proceeds to provide three examples of ways in which the combination of data types provides a superior product as output, with one example being provided for the three cornerstone areas of condition: Structure, Function and Composition.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85603", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85604" } }
{"authors":"Emily Kleber::Arizona State University--Ramon Arrowsmith::Arizona State University--Duane DeVecchio::Arizona State University--Samuel Johnstone::Stanford University--Tammy Rittenour::Utah State Univ--", "title":"T31A-2839: Surface response of blind thrust shown from high resolution topographic data and updated geochronology at Wheeler Ridge, CA", "abstract":"Wheeler Ridge is an asymmetric east-propagating anticline (10km axis, 330m relief) above a north-vergent blind thrust deforming Quaternary alluvial fan and shallow marine rocks at the northern front of the Transverse Ranges, San Joaquin Valley, CA. This area was a research foci in the 1990's when the soils, u-series soil carbonate dating, and subsurface structure of deformed strata identified from oil wells were used to create a kinematic model of deformation, and estimates of fault slip, uplift, and lateral propagation rates. A recent collection of light detection and ranging (lidar) topographic data and optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) data allow us to complete meter scale topographic analyses of the fluvial networks and hillslopes and correlate geomorphic response to tectonics. We interpret these results using a detailed morphological map and observe drainage network and hillslope process transitions both along and across the fold axis. With lidar topography, we extract common morphometrics (e.g., channel steepness-- ksn, eroded volume, hillslope relief) to illustrate how the landscape is responding to variations in uplift rate along the fold axis and show asymmetry of surface response on the forelimb and backlimb. The forelimb is dominated by large drainages with landslides initiating in the marine units at the core of the fold. Our topographic analysis shows that the stream channel indices values on the forelimb increase along the fold axis, away from the propagation tip. The backlimb drainages are dominantly long and linear with broad ridgelines. Using lidar and fieldwork, we see that uplifted backlimb surfaces preserve the deformed fan surface. The preliminary OSL results from alluvial fan units improve age control of previously defined surfaces, refining our understanding of the deposition and uplift of alluvial fan units on preserved on backlimb.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85604", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85605" } }
{"authors":"Sassan Ostvar::Oregon State University--", "title":"H43G-1597: Simulating the bioﬁlm-induced evolution of pore-scale ﬂow in porous media", "abstract":"We present results on the inﬂuence of bioﬁlms on hydraulic conductivity. In this work, we use computational methods to compute the hydraulic conductivity on bioﬁlms of Shewanella onedensis grown in bead packs. The bioﬁlm and beads were imaged using X-ray computed microtomography, and the change in hydraulic con- ductivity was measured from the change in pressure drop across the column during ﬂow. Our numerical analysis is based on fully-resolved immersed boundary direct numerical simulations of pre- and post-growth ﬂow ﬁelds for three experiments in polydisperse sphere packings with Re = 0.1, 1, and 10. Correpondence between the experiments and the simulations is established by matching the eﬀective hy- draulic conductivity of the columns that is calculated via (1) simulations using the pore geometries that are derived directly from the micro-CT images, and (2) diﬀerential pressure transducer measurments. We discuss several aspects of how the simulations are set up, including the representation of the bioﬁlm surface and interfacial boundary conditions, and study the structural changes to the ﬂow ﬁeld as a result of bioﬁlm growth. We also use these numerical data to further validate the method of volume averaging with closure as a viable tool for predicting the hydraulic conductivity from knowledge of the pore space geometry.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85605", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85606" } }
{"authors":"Ozgur Kozaci::Fugro Consultants, Inc. Walnut Creek--Dean Ostenaa::Organization Not Listed--Joshua Goodman::Fugro Consultants, Inc. Walnut Creek--Mark Zellman::Fugro Consultants, Inc. Lakewood--Jeffrey Hoeft::Fugro Consultants, Inc. Walnut Creek--Janet Sowers::Fugro Consultants, Inc. Ventura--Tom Retson::Blue Castle Holdings Inc.--", "title":"T31A-2824: Characterizing the Iron Wash fault: A fault line scarp in Utah", "abstract":"The Iron Wash fault (IWF) is an approximately 30 mile-long, NW-SE trending structure, oriented perpendicular to the San Rafael Monocline near Green River in Utah. IWF exhibits well-expressed geomorphic features such as a linear escarpment with consistently north side down displacement. The fault coincides with an abrupt change in San Rafael Monocline dip angle along its eastern margin. The IWF is exposed in incised drainages where Jurassic Navajo sandstone (oldest) and Lower Carmel Formation (old), are juxtaposed against Jurassic Entrada sandstone (younger) and Quaternary alluvium (youngest). To assess the recency of activity of the IWF we performed detailed geomorphic mapping and a paleoseismic trenching investigation. A benched trench was excavated across a Quaternary fluvial terrace remnant across the mapped trace of the IWF. The uppermost gravel units and overlying colluvium are exposed in the trench across the projection of the fault. In addition, we mapped the basal contact of the Quaternary gravel deposit in relation to the adjacent fault exposures in detail to show the geometry of the basal contact near and across the fault. We find no evidence of vertical displacement of these Quaternary gravels. A preliminary U-series date of calcite cementing unfaulted fluvial gravels and OSL dating of a sand lens within the unfaulted fluvial gravels yielded approximately 304,000 years and 78,000 years, respectively. These preliminary results of independent dating methods constrains the timing of last activity of the IWF to greater than 78,000 years before present suggesting that IWF not an active structure. Its distinct geomorphic expression is most likely the result of differential erosion, forming a fault-line scarp.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85606", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85607" } }
{"authors":"Ronda Strauch::University of Washington Seattle Campus--Erkan Istanbulluoglu::University of Washington Seattle Campus--Sai Siddhartha Nudurupati::University of Washington--", "title":"NH44B-06: Landslide Hazard from Coupled Inherent and Dynamic Probabilities", "abstract":"Landslide hazard research has typically been conducted independently from hydroclimate research. We sought to unify these two lines of research to provide regional scale landslide hazard information for risk assessments and resource management decision-making. Our approach couples an empirical inherent landslide probability, based on a frequency ratio analysis, with a numerical dynamic probability, generated by combining subsurface water recharge and surface runoff from the Variable Infiltration Capacity (VIC) macro-scale land surface hydrologic model with a finer resolution probabilistic slope stability model. Landslide hazard mapping is advanced by combining static and dynamic models of stability into a probabilistic measure of geohazard prediction in both space and time. This work will aid resource management decision-making in current and future landscape and climatic conditions. The approach is applied as a case study in North Cascade National Park Complex in northern Washington State.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85607", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85608" } }
{"authors":"F. Scott Anderson::Southwest Research Institute Boulder--Tom Whitaker::Southwest Research Institute Boulder--Jonathan Levine::Colgate University--David Draper::NASA Johnson Space Center--William Harris::NASA Johnson Space Center--Jon Olansen::NASA Johnson Space Center--Jennifer Devolites::NASA Johnson Space Center--", "title":"P11B-2103: A Proof of Concept for In-Situ Lunar Dating", "abstract":"We have obtained improved 87Rb-87Sr isochrons for the Duluth Gabbro, an analog for lunar KREEP rocks, using a prototype spaceflight laser ablation resonance ionization mass spectrometer (LARIMS). The near-side of the Moon comprises previously un-sampled, KREEP rich, young-lunar basalts critical for calibrating the <3.5 Ga history of the Moon, and hence the solar system, since 3.5 Ga. Measurement of the Duluth Gabbro is a proof of concept of lunar in-situ dating to constrain lunar history. Using a novel normalization approach, and by correcting for matrix-dependent isotope effects, we have been able to obtain a date of 1100 ± 200 Ma (Figure 1), compared to the previously established thermal ionization mass spectrometry measurement of 1096 ± 14 Ma. The precision of LARIMS is sufficient to constrain the current 1 Ga uncertainty of the lunar flux curve, allowing us to reassess the timing of peak lunar volcanism, and constrain lunar thermal evolution. Furthermore, an updated lunar flux curve has implications throughout the solar system. For example, Mars could have undergone a longer epoch of voluminous, shield-forming volcanism and associated mantle evolution, as well as a longer era of abundant volatiles and hence potential habitability. These alternative chronologies could even affect our understanding of the evolution of life on Earth: under the classic chronology, life is thought to have originated after the dwindling of bombardment, but under the alternative chronology, it might have appeared during heavy bombardment. In order to resolve the science questions regarding the history of the Moon, and in light of the Duluth Gabbro results, we recently proposed a Discovery mission called MARE: The Moon Age and Regolith Explorer. MARE would accomplish these goals by landing on a young, nearside lunar basalt flow southwest of Aristarchus that has a crater density corresponding to a highly uncertain absolute age, collecting >10 rock samples, and assessing their radioisotopic age, geochemistry, and mineralogy.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85608", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85609" } }
{"authors":"Katsuya Kaneko::Kyoto University--Koichi Ito::Kyoto University--Kodai Iwahori::Kyoto University--Yuichi Anbe::Kyoto University--", "title":"PA43C-2199: Development of mobile sensor for volcanic observation “HOMURA”: Test campaign at Kirishima Iwo-yama, SW Japan", "abstract":"Monitoring volcanoes near active craters is important to know symptoms and transitions of volcanic eruptions. In order to observe volcanic phenomena near craters according to the circumstance, monitoring system with unmanned robots are useful. We have been trying to develop a practical UGV-type robot, and have completed a prototype, which we named ` Homura` . Homura is a small-sized, vehicle-type robot with six wheels (750 x 430 x 310 mm in dimensions and a weight of about 12 kg). Homura is remotely controlled with mobile phone radio waves; it can move in volcanic fields and send real time data of sensors equipped in the vehicle to the base station. We carried out a test campaign of Homura from Feb. 19th to Apr. 8th, 2015 at Iwo-yama to examine if Homura can work for a few month in natural volcanic fields. Iwo-yama is one of craters in the Kirishima volcanic field, SW Japan; the area within 1 km from the crater was an off-limit area from Oct. 24th, 2014 to May 5th, 2015 because volcanic seismicity there was active and eruption might occur. On Feb. 19th, we carried and put Homura at the rim of the crater. Unfortunately, mobile phone connectivity was not entirely stable around Iwo-yama. Then, we decided not to move Homura and only to obtain real time data of the sensors (a camera, CO2 gas sensor, and thermometer). After we returned to our office, we operated Homura for one to two hours every day until Apr. 8th. Although the weather was often bad (rain, fog, or cold temperature) during the test campaign, we could completely operate Homura without any trouble. On Apr. 8th, the battery in Homura ran down. After we collected Homura from Iwo-yama and recharged the battery, Homura perfectly worked again. The results of this campaign indicate that Homura stably operates for a long time in volcanic field. Homura is useful as simple monitoring station in volcanic fields where mobile phone connection is available.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85609", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85610" } }
{"authors":"Neil Murphy::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Stuart Jefferies::Institute for Astronomy--Carol Raymond::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--David Pierce::Columbus Technologies and Services, Inc.--Olivia Dawson::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"EP52B-08: Space Physics Instruments for Nano-Spacecraft", "abstract":"Recent advances in CubeSat capabilities have prompted the development of increasingly ambitious mission concepts. These address significant science goals that were previously assumed to be addressable only by larger missions, and often include distributed measurements from multiple platforms. In parallel, space physics instruments are being developed that can meet the packaging requirements of CubeSats, and yet deliver high fidelity measurements. We will describe the development of two such instruments, a vector helium magnetometer and Doppler-magnetograph, and discuss several mission concepts that address outstanding problems in heliophysics.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85610", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85611" } }
{"authors":"Glynis Lough::U.S. Global Change Research Program--Robert Wolfe::U.S. Global Change Research Program NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Justin Goldstein::ICF International, Inc. U.S. Global Change Research Program--", "title":"IN12A-06: Traceable Data and a Transparent Process: Experiences from the Sustained National Climate Assessment", "abstract":"The U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP) is conducting a sustained National Climate Assessment (NCA) process that includes a substantial emphasis on providing traceable evidence for climate science. The delivery of the 2014 NCA marked a new way of providing transparency, documenting metadata, and improving user access via the Global Change Information System. Ultimately, these efforts to provide actionable information, data, and tools about climate change impacts and vulnerability will lead to increased resilience of our communities. Of course, implementing new approaches brings new challenges as well as opportunities. Complete transparency is in many ways a change from the established way of publishing science, and requires authors and data providers to document details with a depth and precision that many are unused to. The depth of metadata needed to provide a user with full traceability of the conclusions – i.e., from a published paper to all of its underlying datasets, their observational instruments, resulting model output, related figures – will need to be built over time. The Program’s efforts to build GCIS and connections to other climate data, information, and tools will also assist coordination among Federal agencies, which manage their data resources individually and maintain their own data policies. Continued collaboration will identify paths forward that meet the collective need without constraining agencies' abilities to meet their own needs and those of their stakeholders.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85611", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85612" } }
{"authors":"Laureline Sangalli::Royal Military College of Canada--", "title":"SM12B-04: Altitude Variations of the Peak Auroral Emissions within Auroral Structures", "abstract":"The MIRACLE network monitors auroral activity in the Fennoscandian sector of Europe. Network stations cover the range of 55° to 57° magnetic latitude North and span two hours in magnetic local time. Some of the MIRACLE network stations include digital all-sky cameras (ASC) with overlapping field-of-views located at the latitude aurora occurs. The ASCs in this network operate at three different wavelengths: 427.8 nm (blue line), 557.7 nm (green line) and 630.0 nm (red line). These wavelengths are selected using narrow band filters. The new ASC systems are based on electron multiplying CCDs (emCCD), which allow higher time and spatial resolutions. The peak auroral emission altitude is determined using two ASC images from a station pair. Different auroral events are used to evaluate the altitude variations of the peak auroral emissions within auroral structures and its evolution in time.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85612", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85613" } }
{"authors":"Liliana Nunez::Scripps Institution of Oceanography--", "title":"A11M-0227: Dependence of the radiative forcing of the climate system on fossil fuel type", "abstract":"Climate change mitigation strategies are greatly directed towards the reduction of CO2 emissions and other greenhouse gases from fossil fuel combustion to limit warming to 2º C in this century. For example, the Clean Power Plan aims to reduce CO2 emissions from the power sector by 32% of 2005 levels by 2030 by increasing power plant efficiency but also by switching from coal-fired power plants to natural gas-fired power plants. It is important to understand the impact of such fuel switching on climate change. While all fossil fuels emit CO2, they also emit other pollutants with varying effects on climate, health and agriculture. First, The emission of CO2 per joule of energy produced varies significantly between coal, oil and natural gas. Second, the complexity that the co-emitted pollutants add to the perturbations in the climate system necessitates the detangling of radiative forcing for each type of fossil fuel. The historical (1850-2011) net radiative forcing of climate as a function of fuel type (coal, oil, natural gas and biofuel) is reconstructed. The results reveal the significant dependence of the CO2 and the non-CO2 forcing on fuel type. The CO2 forcing per joule of energy is largest for coal. Radiative forcing from the co-emitted pollutants (black carbon, methane, nitrogen oxides, organic carbon, sulfate aerosols) changes the global mean CO2 forcing attributed to coal and oil significantly. For natural gas, the CO2-only radiative forcing from gas is increased by about 60% when the co-emitted pollutants are included.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85613", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85614" } }
{"authors":"Yukitoshi Fukahata::Disaster Prevention Research Institute, Kyoto University--Mitsuhiro Matsu'ura::Inst. Statistical Mathematics--", "title":"T33B-04: Formation of Island Arc-Trench System due to Plate Subduction on the Basis of Elastic Dislocation Theory", "abstract":"The most conspicuous cumulative deformation in subduction zones is the formation of island arc-trench system. A pair of anomalies in topography and free-air gravity, high in the arc and low around the trench, is observed without exceptions all over the world. Since the 1960s, elastic dislocation theory has been widely used to interpret coseismic crustal deformation. For the modeling of longer-term crustal deformation, it is necessary to consider viscoelastic properties of the asthenosphere. By simply applying elastic-viscoelastic dislocation theory to plate subduction, Matsu'ura and Sato (1989, GJI) have shown that some crustal deformation remains after the completion of one earthquake cycle, which means that crustal deformation accumulates with time in a long term due to plate subduction. In fact, by constructing a plate interface model in and around Japan, Hashimoto, Fukui and Matsu'ura (2004, PAGEOPH) have demonstrated that the computed vertical displacements due to steady plate subduction well explain the observed free-air gravity anomaly pattern. Recently, we got a lucid explanation of crustal deformation due to plate subduction. In subduction zones, oceanic plates bend and descend into the mantle. Because the bending of oceanic plates is usually not spontaneous, there exists kinematic interaction between the oceanic and overriding plates, which causes cumulative deformation of the overriding plate. This may be understood based on the law of action and reaction: one is bending of an oceanic plate and the other is deformation of the overriding plate. As a special case, it is useful to consider plate subduction along a part of true circle. In this case, crustal deformation due to steady subduction is solely caused by the effect of gravity, because dislocation along a circle does not cause any intrinsic internal deformation. When an oceanic plate is descending along an arcuate plate interface from the right-hand side, according to dislocation theory, the oceanic plate rotates anti-clockwise and the overriding plate rotates clockwise. The gravity, however, requires both plates at a distance from the trench to remain in the original gravitational equilibrium, which results in upward bending of both plates. As subduction proceeds, the deformation of the upward bending accumulates with time.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85614", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85615" } }
{"authors":"Emily Gochis::Michigan Technological University--Jacqueline Huntoon::Michigan Technological University--", "title":"ED34C-07: Mi-STAR: Designing Integrated Science Curriculum to Address the Next Generation Science Standards and Their Foundations", "abstract":"Mi-STAR (Michigan Science Teaching and Assessment Reform, http://mi-star.mtu.edu/ ) was funded by the Herbert H. and Grace A. Dow Foundation to reform K-12 science education to present science as an integrated body of knowledge that is applied to address societal issues. To achieve this goal, Mi-STAR is developing an integrated science curriculum for the middle grades that will be aligned with the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). Similar to the geosciences, the curriculum requires the integration of science, engineering and math content to explore 21st-century issues and demonstrates how these concepts can be used in service of society. The curriculum is based on the Mi-STAR Unit Specification Chart which pairs interdisciplinary themes with bundled NGSS Performance Expectations. Each unit is developed by a collaborative team of K-12 teachers, university STEM content experts and science education experts. Prior to developing a unit, each member on the team attends the on-line Mi-STAR Academy, completing 18+ hours of professional development (PD). This on-line PD program familiarizes teachers and experts with necessary pedagogical and content background knowledge, including NGSS and three-dimensional learning. With this background, teams use a staged, backwards design process to craft a multi-week unit based on a series of performance based tasks, or ‘challenges’ that engage students in actively doing science and engineering. Each unit includes Disciplinary Core Ideas from multiple disciplines, which focus on local and familiar examples that demonstrate the relevance of science in student's lives. Performance-based assessments are interwoven throughout the unit. Mi-STAR units will go through extensive pilot testing in several school districts across the state of Michigan. Additionally, the Mi-STAR program will develop teacher professional development programs to support implementation of the curriculum and design a pre-service teacher program in integrated science. We will share preliminary results on the collaborative Mi-STAR process of designing integrated science curriculum to address NGSS.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85615", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85616" } }
{"authors":"Teruyuki Nakajima::JAXA Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency--Daisuke Goto::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Tie Dai::IAP Insititute of Atmospheric Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Shota Misawa::Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute University of Tokyo--Junya Uchida::University of Tokyo--Nick Schutgens::University of Oxford--Makiko Hashimoto::JAXA Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency--Eiji Oikawa::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Hideaki Takenaka::JAXA Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency--Haruo Tsuruta::RESTEC Remote Sensing Technology Center of Japan--Toshiro Inoue::Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute University of Tokyo--Akiko Higurashi::National Institute for Environmental Studies--", "title":"A24E-03: An effort for developing a seamless transport modeling and remote sensing system for air pollutants", "abstract":"Wide area of the globe, like Asian region, still suffers from a large emission of air pollutants and cause serious impacts on the earth's climate and the public health of the area. Launch of an international initiative, Climate and Clean Air Coalition (CCAC), is an example of efforts to ease the difficulties by reducing Short-Lived Climate Pollutants (SLCPs), i.e., black carbon aerosol, methane and other short-lived atmospheric materials that heat the earth's system, along with long-lived greenhouse gas mitigation. Impact evaluation of the air pollutants, however, has large uncertainties. We like to introduce a recent effort of projects MEXT/SALSA and MOEJ/S-12 to develop a seamless transport model for atmospheric constituents, NICAM-Chem, that is flexible enough to cover global scale to regional scale by the NICAM nonhydrostatic dynamic core (NICAM), coupled with SPRINTARS aerosol model, CHASER atmospheric chemistry model and with their three computational grid systems, i.e. quasi homogeneous grids, stretched grids and diamond grids. A local ensemble transform Kalman filter/smoother with this modeling system was successfully applied to data from MODIS, AERONET, and CALIPSO for global assimilation/inversion and surface SPM and SO2 air pollution monitoring networks for Japanese area assimilation. My talk will be extended to discuss an effective utility of satellite remote sensing of aerosols using Cloud and Aerosol Imager (CAI) on board the GOSAT satellite and Advanced Himawari Imager (AHI) on board the new third generation geostationary satellite, Himawari-8. The CAI has a near-ultraviolet channel of 380nm with 500m spatial resolution and the AHI has high frequency measurement capability of every 10 minutes. These functions are very effective for accurate land aerosol remote sensing, so that a combination with the developed aerosol assimilation system is promising.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85616", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85618" } }
{"authors":"Travis Dahl::Michigan State University--Anthony Kendall::Michigan State University--David Hyndman::Michigan State University--", "title":"H23E-1629: Comparing Sediment Yield Predictions from Different Hydrologic Modeling Schemes", "abstract":"Sediment yield, or the delivery of sediment from the landscape to a river, is a difficult process to accurately model. It is primarily a function of hydrology and climate, but influenced by landcover and the underlying soils. These additional factors make it much more difficult to accurately model than water flow alone. It is not intuitive what impact different hydrologic modeling schemes may have on the prediction of sediment yield. Here, two implementations of the Modified Universal Soil Loss Equation (MUSLE) are compared to examine the effects of hydrologic model choice. Both the Soil and Water Assessment Tool (SWAT) and the Landscape Hydrology Model (LHM) utilize the MUSLE for calculating sediment yield. SWAT is a lumped parameter hydrologic model developed by the USDA, which is commonly used for predicting sediment yield. LHM is a fully distributed hydrologic model developed primarily for integrated surface and groundwater studies at the watershed to regional scale. SWAT and LHM models were developed and tested for two large, adjacent watersheds in the Great Lakes region; the Maumee River and the St. Joseph River. The models were run using a variety of single model and ensemble downscaled climate change scenarios from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project 5 (CMIP5). The initial results of this comparison are discussed here.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85618", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85619" } }
{"authors":"Alyson Santoro::University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science--", "title":"Dynamic nitrous oxide cycling in Chesapeake Bay", "abstract":"Nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions to the atmosphere from coastal areas, the timescales over which they vary, and the organisms controlling these fluxes are poorly understood. To better characterize N2O dynamics in the Chesapeake Bay, we measured ammonia oxidation and N2O production rates in August and September 2013 in the mesohaline region of the Chesapeake Bay during low oxygen conditions. Surface N2O saturation values ranged from 95 to 231%, with the northernmost transect being a sink for atmospheric N2O. Ammonium oxidation rates were greatest at the interface between ammonium-rich bottom water and oxygenated surface water, ranging between 15 and 133 nM h-1. N2O profiles suggest a source of N2O at the pycnocline and N2O consumption below the pycnocline. An engineering ‘control volume’ budget was used to estimate N2O production and consumption along a 21 km region in the Chesapeake Bay. Advective and diffusive processes were separated from internal N2O production and consumption processes, yielding estimates of atmospheric N2O flux between -0.05 to 0.06 nM h-1; these values agree with estimates of N2O production from nitrification rate measurements and reasonably explain N2O concentration profiles. Despite the high rates of ammonia oxidation measured during the study period, abundance of ammonia-oxidizing bacteria and archaea as determined by quantification of the amoA gene was very low. Our study shows that N2O emissions from the Chesapeake Bay are variable over multiple time and spatial scales and that the Bay can act as both a source and a sink for N2O during stratified summer conditions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85619", "section":""} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85620" } }
{"authors":"Jin Hwang::Korea Water Resources Corporation--Jaewon Kang::Korea Water Resources Corporation--Ae-sook Suh::Korea Water Resources Corporation--", "title":"GC31D-1205: Method for Water Management Considering Long-term Probabilistic Forecasts", "abstract":"This research is aimed at predicting the monthly inflow of the Andong-dam basin in South Korea using long-term probabilistic forecasts to apply long-term forecasts to water management. Forecasted Cumulative Distribution Functions (CDFs) of monthly precipitation are plotted by combining the range of monthly precipitation based on proper Probability Density Function (PDF) in past data with probabilistic forecasts in each category. Ensembles of inflow are estimated by entering generated ensembles of precipitation based on the CDFs into the ‘abcd’ water budget model. The bias and RMSE between averages in past data and observed inflow are compared to them in forecasted ensembles. In our results, the bias and RMSE of average precipitation in the forecasted ensemble are bigger than in past data, whereas the average inflow in the forecasted ensemble is smaller than in past data. This result could be used for reference data to apply long-term forecasts to water management, because of the limit in the number of forecasted data for verification and differences between the Andong-dam basin and the forecasted regions. This research has significance by suggesting a method of applying probabilistic information in climate variables from long-term forecasts to water management in Korea. Original data of a climate model, which produces long-term probabilistic forecasts should be verified directly as input data of a water budget model in the future, so that a more scientific response in water management against uncertainty of climate change could be reached.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85620", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85622" } }
{"authors":"Vanessa Garayburu-Caruso::University of New Mexico Main Campus--Jacob Mortensen::University of New Mexico Main Campus--David Van Horn::University of New Mexico Main Campus--Ricardo Gonzalez-Pinzon::University of New Mexico Main Campus--", "title":"H13L-1764: Understanding Nutrient Processing Under Similar Hydrologic Conditions Along a River Continuum", "abstract":"Eutrophication is one of the main causes of water impairment across the US. The fate of nutrients in streams is typically described by the dynamic coupling of physical processes and biochemical processes. However, isolating each of these processes and determining its contribution to the whole system is challenging due to the complexity of the physical, chemical and biological domains. We conducted column experiments seeking to understand nutrient processing in shallow sediment-water interactions along representative sites of the Jemez River-Rio Grande continuum (eight stream orders), in New Mexico (USA). For each stream order, we used a set of 6 columns packed with 3 different sediments, i.e., Silica Cone Density Sand ASTM D 1556 (0.075-2.00 mm), gravel (> 2mm) and native sediments from each site. We incubated the sediments for three months and performed tracer experiments in the laboratory under identical flow conditions, seeking to normalize the physical processes along the river continuum. We added a short-term pulse injection of NO3, resazurin and NaCl to each column and determined metabolism and NO3 processing using the Tracer Additions for Spiraling Curve Characterization method (TASCC). Our methods allowed us to study how changes in bacterial communities and sediment composition along the river continuum define nutrient processing.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85622", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85623" } }
{"authors":"Patricia Saco::University of Newcastle--Mariano Moreno-de las Heras::Institute of Environmental Assessment & Water Research (IDAEA-CSIC)--Samira Azadi::University of Newcastle--Saskia Keesstra::Wageningen University--", "title":"H14C-05: Investigating Ecohydrology and Connectivity Thresholds along a Precipitation Gradient in Australia", "abstract":"Drylands are very sensitive to climatic or anthropogenic pressures and prone to critical degradation thresholds which make rehabilitation efforts considerably difficult. In these systems, the spatial structure of vegetation and the spatial redistribution of overland flow are tightly linked through feedbacks mechanisms. Disturbances, induced by human activities or climate change, can disrupt the spatial distribution of vegetation triggering erosion and substantial water losses by increasing landscape hydrological connectivity and damaging ecosystem function. Characterizing the integrity of these coevolving patterns is especially relevant for the detection of landscape degradation processes and possible threshold behaviour. Here we investigate the impact of degradation processes, induced by grazing pressure, across the Mulga Lands Bioregion in Australia. We combine remote sensing observations and a modelling approach to analyse changes in ecosystem connectivity and the existence of threshold behaviour along a precipitation gradient (250mm to 450mm annual average rainfall). Vegetation patterns are derived from high resolution remote sensing images, and Rainfall Use Efficiency (RUE) estimated from precipitation data and MODIS vegetation indices for a total of 40 plots along this gradient. A critical degradation threshold, associated to loss of vegetation cover appears for sites with lower mean annual precipitation. In these sites, hillslopes with high vegetation cover display low hydrologic connectivity and high RUE, and can be therefore classified as “functional”. However, below a threshold vegetation cover we found highly “dysfunctional hillslopes” characterized by high connectivity and very low RUE. We found that this threshold behaviour tends to disappear for the north-western sites with higher mean annual rainfall. We further analytically investigate the dynamic response of these hillslopes using a coupled landform evolution-vegetation model to simulate coevolving vegetation patterns and geomorphology. We use the model to analyse changes in hydrologic and sediment connectivity responsible for triggering this threshold behaviour for selected plots along this precipitation gradient. The implications for ecosystem resilience and land management strategies are discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85623", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85624" } }
{"authors":"David Bernstein::Purdue University--Jesse Bausell::University of California Santa Cruz--Shane Grigsby::University of Colorado at Boulder--Raphael Kudela::University of California Santa Cruz--", "title":"GC23K-1246: Finding Blackbody Temperature and Emissivity on a Sub-Pixel Scale", "abstract":"Surface temperature and emissivity provide important insight into the ecosystem being remotely sensed. Dozier (1981) proposed a an algorithm to solve for percent coverage and temperatures of two different surface types (e.g. sea surface, cloud cover, etc.) within a given pixel, with a constant value for emissivity assumed. Here we build on Dozier (1981) by proposing an algorithm that solves for both temperature and emissivity of a water body within a satellite pixel by assuming known percent coverage of surface types within the pixel. Our algorithm generates thermal infrared (TIR) and emissivity end-member spectra for the two surface types. Our algorithm then superposes these end-member spectra on emissivity and TIR spectra emitted from four pixels with varying percent coverage of different surface types. The algorithm was tested preliminarily (48 iterations) using simulated pixels containing more than one surface type, with temperature and emissivity percent errors of ranging from 0 to 1.071% and 2.516 to 15.311% respectively [1] . We then tested the algorithm using a MASTER image from MASTER collected as part of the NASA Student Airborne Research Program (NASA SARP). Here the temperature of water was calculated to be within 0.22 K of in situ data. The algorithm calculated emissivity of water with an accuracy of 0.13 to 1.53% error for Salton Sea pixels collected with MASTER, also collected as part of NASA SARP. This method could improve retrievals for the HyspIRI sensor.  [1] Percent error for emissivity was generated by averaging percent error across all selected bands widths.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85624", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85627" } }
{"authors":"Valeriy Ivanov::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Rafael Oliveira::State University of Campinas--Elizabeth Agee::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Mauro Brum::State University of Campinas--Scott Saleska::University of Arizona--Simone Fatichi::ETH Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich--Greg Ewing::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--", "title":"B51D-0469: Contrasting Strategies of Tree Function in a Seasonal Amazon Rainforest", "abstract":"The increased frequency and severity of drought conditions in the Amazon Basin region have emphasized the question of rainforest vulnerability and resilience to heat and drought-induced stresses. However, what emerges from much research is that the impacts of droughts, essential controlling factors of the rainforest function, and variability of tree-scale strategies are yet to be fully understood. We present here a preliminary analysis of hydraulic relations of a seasonal Amazon rainforest using a set of ecohydrologic data collected through the GoAmazon project over dry and wet seasons. Expressions of different hydraulic strategies are identified that convey different implications for tree resilience during short- (diurnal) and longer-term (seasonal) stress periods. These hydraulic strategies appear to be inter-related with the tree growth and non-structural carbohydrate dynamics, contributing to the understanding of trait coordination at the whole-plant scale. Integration of individual responses is conducted over a range of wood density and exposure conditions. The results of this research thus shed light on the implication of variations in the rainforest function for future stresses, vital for predictive models of ecosystem dynamics of next generation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85627", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85628" } }
{"authors":"Melissa Rice::Western Washington University--Briony Horgan::Purdue University--Abigail Fraeman::California Institute of Technology--Sheridan Ackiss::Purdue University--", "title":"P43D-2144: New Constraints on the Deposition and Alteration History of Mt. Sharp in Gale Crater, Mars", "abstract":"The Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) rover is currently investigating the lower stratigraphy of northwestern Mt. Sharp, the 5 km thick stack of layered rock that makes up the central mound of Gale Crater. Previous near-infrared spectral investigations from orbit using CRISM have shown that this portion of the mound exhibits a diverse mineralogy that may indicate changing aqueous environments on early Mars. The relationship of these mineralogic units to stratigraphic units across the full extent of Mt. Sharp is not well understood, although such relationships are key to interpreting the depositional and digenetic history. Here we present new mineral maps derived from CRISM data, as well as detailed stratigraphic columns from around the mound, and we use these new results to constrain hypotheses for the modes of aqueous alteration. Our new CRISM mineral maps are projected and co-registered to HiRISE imagery and DEMs, and include Fe/Mg-smectites, poly- and mono-hydrated sulfates, iron oxides, high-Ca pyroxene, and a ferrous phase with a strong red spectral slope between 1.1-1.8 μm, which is consistent with ferrous alteration phases like ferrous clays. This latter unit consistently overlies Fe/Mg-smectites in NW and SW Mt. Sharp, and is located in topographic benches that are either immediately stratigaphically above hematite-bearing ridges. The presence of ferrous alteration phases supports previous interpretations that hematite formed when an Fe2+-bearing fluid encountered an oxidizing environment. In this scenario, the reducing fluids were created by long-term oxygen limited alteration of Fe-bearing minerals in the near-surface. Downward movement of these fluids may have been limited by the underlying clay layer, forcing lateral flow. On emergence at the surface, the iron was oxidized by photochemical or other redox reactions. On Earth, similar pedogenic processes form hematite ironpans on slopes surrounding poorly-drained hilltops, as well as ancient banded iron formations in shallow coastal waters. The reducing environment inferred from the ferrous phases could be a site of high organic preservation potential, and the redox gradient inferred from the ferric/ferrous mineral relationship could have served as an energy source for chemolithotrophic microbes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85628", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85629" } }
{"authors":"Pius Lee::NOAA College Park--Youhua Tang::NOAA Camp Springs--Li Pan::Cooperative Institute for Climate and Satellites University of Maryland--James Szykman::US EPA, ORD, National Exposure Research Laboratory--Todd Plessel::US EPA / Lockheed--Daniel Tong::Cooperative Institute for Climate and Satellites University of Maryland--Quanhua Liu::NOAA College Park--", "title":"A21A-0009: Verification of CMAQ modeling with Discover-AQ campaigns against measurements and efficacy of emission inversion modeling", "abstract":"NASA has led a few DISCOVER-AQ campaigns in recent years: (1) Baltimore/Washington in July 2011, (2) Central valley, CA in January – February 2013, (3) Houston, TX in September 2013, and co-led with NCAR (4) Front Range, CO in July – August 2014. NOAA Air Resources Laboratory has participated in all these campaigns in the role of air quality forecasting support. For some of these campaigns post analyses were performed with the possible help of after-the-fact observed data from satellite retrieved radiances to constrain emissions through the Community Radiative Transfer Model (CRTM) developed at the Joint Center for Satellite Data Assimilation. It is our experience that despite the vastly different chemical regime, season, terrain, and meteorological conditions of the domain for the campaigns, we found that the emissions input and the U.S. EPA Community Air Quality model (CMAQ), the forecasting chemical transport model used to generate the forecast had severely under-estimated formaldehyde (HCHO), and carbon monoxide (CO) aloft between surface and the middle of the free troposphere – 500 hPa. Post analyses point to two strong suspects of these deficiencies: (a) emission projection fed into CMAQ, and/or (b) erroneously fast removal of the species. We investigate both of these potential deficiencies and for the former possible reason we looked into data assimilation and possible inverse modeling to adjust emission projection for CMAQ. We will elaborate more on the CRTM which plays a critical role in this aspect of remedying erroneous inputs to CMAQ. In addition, we will utilize some satellite products to improve initial fields of aerosols and CO for air quality forecasting. Suomi NPP VIIRS aerosol optical depth (AOD) environmental data record (EDR) delivers global aerosol information daily. The Unique CrIS/ATMS Processing System (NUCAPS) operationally generates vertical profiles of atmospheric carbonate EDRs (CO, CO2, and CH4) and ozone during day and night. The AOD can be assimilated by using the CRTM. The carbonate EDRs and ozone EDR can be directly assimilated.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85629", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85630" } }
{"authors":"Zuowei Xie::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--", "title":"A51H-0157: Extreme Temperature Regimes during the Cool Season and their Associated Large-Scale Circulations", "abstract":"In the cool season (November-March), extreme temperature events (ETEs) always hit the continental United States (US) and provide significant societal impacts. According to the anomalous amplitudes of the surface air temperature (SAT), there are two typical types of ETEs, e.g. cold waves (CWs) and warm waves (WWs). This study used cluster analysis to categorize both CWs and WWs into four distinct regimes respectively and investigated their associated large-scale circulations on intra-seasonal time scale. Most of the CW regimes have large areal impact over the continental US. However, the distribution of cold SAT anomalies varies apparently in four regimes. In the sea level, the four CW regimes are characterized by anomalous high pressure over North America (near and to west of cold anomaly) with different extension and orientation. As a result, anomalous northerlies along east flank of anomalous high pressure convey cold air into the continental US. To the middle troposphere, the leading two groups feature large-scale and zonally-elongated circulation anomaly pattern, while the other two regimes exhibit synoptic wavetrain pattern with meridionally elongated features. As for the WW regimes, there are some patterns symmetry and anti-symmetry with respect to CW regimes. The WW regimes are characterized by anomalous low pressure and southerlies wind over North America. The first and fourth groups are affected by remote forcing emanating from North Pacific, while the others appear mainly locally forced.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85630", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85631" } }
{"authors":"Jiayi Chen::Independent Schools Foundation Academy--Kono Lemke::University of Hong Kong--", "title":"ED41A-0828: Global Optimization of FeNi Clusters by Basin Hopping: Insight into Awaruite Cluster Structures with High Hydrogenation Capacity", "abstract":"Naturally occurring Iron-nickel alloys form during water-rock interaction in the Earth’s crust (serpentinization), and stand out as a somewhat rare but highly catalytic phase. Interestingly, these “new” alloys are now receiving huge attention, primarily because of their catalytic capacity to accelerate bond rupture and formation processes in small organic molecules relevant to the origin of life, but also because they are viewed as nature’s stockpile of alloy surfaces that would assist in the hydrogenation of greenhouse gases (reductive sequestration). Two forms of ‘Ni-Fe’ metal alloys have been examined in detail here, namely awaruite (Ni81Fe19) and tetrataenite (Ni50Fe50); however, intermediate, i.e. solid solutions do exist along the Fe-Ni binary, so that a large group of Ni-Fe alloy phases would probably form during serpentinization-type processes. In this study, the atomic structure of Ni-Fe alloy will be investigated containing 75 nickel atoms and 25 iron atoms (Ni75Fe25), a composition closely related to awaruite. We will also present results in which we have examined the occurrence of so-called magic number awaruite clusters at the positions n=13,55,147, all of which exhibit a high stability relative to their atom number precursors and successors. Awaruite clusters with n=13,55,147 stand out in terms of the total atom binding energy and maintain highly organized structures; in the case of n=13 the cluster is comprised of central metal atoms sandwiched between two pentameric ring moieties. These clusters may react with molecular hydrogen in preparation for various hydrogenation reactions that ultimately give rise to small but important molecules such as ammonia, methane, ethane etc. Here we will present results of a series of molecular simulations that we examine specific sites on the “awaruite” cluster surface and the affinity of H2 to attach and dissociate on various surface sites of awaruite clusters. These simulations build on a basin-hopping algorithm and density functional calculations, in which stable structures of, i.e. Fen·H, Nin·H, Fe13-n-Nin·H and related clusters are predicted. A detailed discussion of these results, particularly their relevance for hydrogenation processes on early Earth and its impact on Earth’s inventory of prebiotic molecules will be presented.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85631", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85632" } }
{"authors":"Ulrik Gliese::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Daniel Gershman::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--John Dorelli::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Levon Avanov::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Alex Barrie::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--George Clark::Catholic University of America--Joseph Kujawski::Siena College--Albert Mariano::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Victoria Coffey::NASA Marshall Space Flight Center--Corey Tucker::Global Science & Technology--Dennis Chornay::University of Maryland College Park--Nga Cao::Orbital Sciences Corporation NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Michael Zeuch::Northrop Grumman Electronic Systems--Charles Dickson::AS and D, Inc.--Darrell Smith::Orbital Sciences Corporation--Chad Salo::Stellar Solutions--Elizabeth MacDonald::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Stephen Kreisler::Columbus Technologies and Services--Arthur Jacques::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Barbara Giles::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Craig Pollock::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--", "title":"SM51A-2519: Concepts and Results of New Method for Accurate Ground and In-Flight Calibration of the Particle Spectrometers of the Fast Plasma Investigation on NASA’s Magnetospheric MultiScale Mission", "abstract":"The Fast Plasma Investigation (FPI) on NASA’s Magnetospheric MultiScale (MMS) mission employs 16 Dual Electron Spectrometers and 16 Dual Ion Spectrometers with 4 of each type on each of 4 spacecraft to enable fast (30 ms for electrons; 150 ms for ions) and spatially differentiated measurements of the full 3D particle velocity distributions. This approach presents a new and challenging aspect to the calibration and operation of these instruments on ground and in flight. The response uniformity, the reliability of their calibration and the approach to handling any temporal evolution of these calibrated characteristics all assume enhanced importance in this application, where we attempt to understand the meaning of particle distributions within the ion and electron diffusion regions of magnetically reconnecting plasmas. We have developed a detailed model of the spectrometer detection system, its behavior and its signal, crosstalk and noise sources. Based on this, we have devised a new calibration method that enables accurate and repeatable measurement of micro-channel plate (MCP) gain, signal loss due to variation in MCP gain and crosstalk effects in one single measurement. The foundational concepts of this new calibration method, named threshold scan, are presented. It is shown how this method has been successfully applied both on ground and in-flight to achieve highly accurate and precise calibration of all 64 spectrometers. Calibration parameters that will evolve in flight are determined daily providing a robust characterization of sensor suite performance, as a basis for both in-situ hardware adjustment and data processing to scientific units, throughout mission lifetime. This is shown to be very desirable as the instruments will produce higher quality raw science data that will require smaller post-acquisition data‑corrections using results from in-flight derived pitch angle distribution measurements and ground calibration measurements. The practical application of the method is presented together with the achieved calibration results from both ground and in-flight calibration. Finally, we will present the residual post-processing correction performed from in-flight derived pitch angle distribution measurements of the science data acquired with the calibrated spectrometers.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85632", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85633" } }
{"authors":"Ashish Sharma::University of Notre Dame--Pavan Kulkarni::Geophysics Centre of Evora (CGE)--Hari Dasari::Geophysics Centre of Evora (CGE)--Daniele Bortoli::Geophysics Centre of Evora (CGE)--Rui Salgado::University of Évora--Ana Maria Silva::University of Évora--", "title":"A21A-0068: Nocturnal surface ozone enhancement over Portugal: Influence of different atmospheric conditions", "abstract":"Five distinct events of nocturnal surface ozone (NSO) enhancement were observed, with NSO concentration exceeding 80µg/m3, at multiple ozone (O3) monitoring sites (32 sites) in Portugal, during the winter months (November – February) of the 2000-2010 period. Since O3 production ceases at nighttime, a plausible reasoning for observed bimodal pattern of O3 with enhanced NSO concentration during nighttime (2300-0500 local time) is hypothesized to be related with different atmospheric transport processes. Simultaneous measurements of O3 at 32 spatially distributed sites in Portugal suggest that horizontal advection alone cannot explain the enhancement of NSO. Thus, detailed analysis of the atmospheric conditions with the regional Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model were performed. Results revealed that each of the five NSO enhancement events occurred over the same geographical location under entirely different atmospheric conditions. The first event happened due to the presence of a synoptic scale circulation and downward vertical motion from the free troposphere over Portugal. The second event was a result of a combination of vertical and horizontal transport over a large area. The third event showed that under favorable conditions the high NSO events can last for several days. The fourth event showed that the NSO enhancement can drastically exceed the daytime O3 concentrations over a large area. Finally, the fifth event showed that the enhancement of NSO occurred due to low level jet formation from southwest corner to northeast corner, passing through the mainland of Portugal at around 1.5 km height, associated with the vertical mixing below the jet stream. This study revealed that any single physical phenomenon is not sufficient to explain the NSO enhancement at a given location and large-scale flow patterns with downward vertical motion plays a key role in the enhancement of NSO.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85633", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85634" } }
{"authors":"Drew Syverson::University of Minnesota Twin Cities--Andrew Luhmann::University of Minnesota--Chunyang Tan::University of Minnesota Twin Cities--David Borrok::University of Louisiana at Lafayette--Kang Ding::University of Minnesota Twin Cities--William Seyfried::University of Minnesota Twin Cities--", "title":"OS43A-2012: Fe and Cu isotope fractionation between chalcopyrite and dissolved metal species during hydrothermal recrystallization: An experimental study at 350°C and 500 bars", "abstract":"The equilibrium Fe and Cu isotope fractionation factor between chalcopyrite and dissolved metal species was determined under hydrothermal conditions at 350°C and 500 bars. The experiments took advantage of gold-cell reaction technology, allowing time-series sampling of solution during the hydrothermal recrystallization of chalcopyrite over 3000 hours. One of the recrystallization experiments utilized an anomalous 57Fe spike in solution to quantify the degree and rate of isotopic exchange towards equilibrium between mineral and fluid reservoirs. The time-series 57Fe spike data suggests that chalcopyrite exchanges rapidly with dissolved Fe and Cu in solution and the isotopic fractionation between each metal-bearing reservoir throughout reaction progress, upon dissolution and recrystallization, represents close to equilibrium conditions. The isotope data indicate that the equilibrium fractionation between chalcopyrite and dissolved Fe and Cu at 350°C, Δ56FeCpy-Fe(aq), is 0.129±0.171‰ and Δ65CuCpy-Fe(aq), is -0.201±0.341‰ (2σ), and are in good agreement with recent theoretical equilibrium predictions. Comparison of the experimental data from this study with conjugate chalcopyrite and dissolved Fe and Cu pairs from a variety of hydrothermal systems along the mid-ocean ridge system indicates that chalcopyrite precipitates and recrystallizes at isotopic equilibrium with the fluid during cooling upon ascent to the seafloor. The rapid exchange between the mineral and fluid metal-reservoirs suggests that chalcopyrite effectively records the isotopic composition of the coexisting hydrothermal fluid during the evolution of hydrothermal systems. In addition, the pyrite-chalcopyrite equilibrium Fe isotope fractionation, Δ56FePyr-Cpy, at 350°C is quantified by combination of pyrite-Fe2+(aq) equilibrium fractionation data from Syverson et al., [2013] with chalcopyrite-Fe2+(aq) from this study, resulting in a fractionation of 0.861±0.337‰ (2σ). The empirical sulfide mineral-mineral fractionation determined empirically is consistent with mineral-mineral theoretical predictions and can be coupled with mineral-fluid isotope fractionation systematics to differentiate between different ore depositional processes, of which, chalcopyrite is intimately is involved.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85634", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85635" } }
{"authors":"Kai Wu::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--Thomas Lauvaux::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--Aijun Deng::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--Israel Lopez-Coto::National Institute of Standards and Technology Gaithersburg--Kevin Gurney::Arizona State University--Risa Patarasuk::Arizona State University--Jocelyn Turnbull::GNS Science / Rafter Radiocarbon--Kenneth Davis::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--", "title":"A21G-0228: Sensitivity of Flux Accuracy to Setup of Fossil Fuel and Biogenic CO2 Inverse System in an Urban Environment", "abstract":"The Indianapolis Flux Experiment (INFLUX) aims to utilize a variety of measurements and a high resolution inversion system to estimate the spatial distribution and the temporal variation of anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from the city of Indianapolis. We separated biogenic and fossil fuel CO2 fluxes and tested the sensitivity of inverse flux estimates to inverse system configurations by performing Observing System Simulation Experiments (OSSEs). The a priori CO2 emissions from Hestia were aggregated to 1 km resolution to represent emissions from the Indianapolis metropolitan area and its surroundings. With the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model coupled to a Lagrangian Particle Dispersion Model (LPDM), the physical relations between concentrations at the tower locations and emissions at the surface were simulated at 1 km spatial resolution, hourly. Within a Bayesian synthesis inversion framework, we tested the effect of multiple parameters on our ability to infer fossil fuel CO2 fluxes: the presence of biogenic CO2 fluxes in the optimization procedure, the use of fossil fuel CO2 concentration measurements, the impact of reduced transport errors, the sensitivity to observation density, and the spatio-temporal properties of prior errors. The results indicate that the presence of biogenic CO2 fluxes obviously weakens the ability to invert for the fossil fuel CO2 emissions in an urban environment, but having relatively accurate fossil fuel CO2 concentration measurements can effectively compensate the interference from the biogenic flux component. Reduced transport error and more intensive measurement networks are two possible approaches to retrieve the spatial pattern of the fluxes and decrease the bias in inferred whole-city fossil fuel CO2 emissions. The accuracy of posterior fluxes is very sensitive to the spatial correlation length in the prior flux errors which, if they exist, can enhance significantly our ability to recover the known fluxes and reduce the posterior uncertainties.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85635", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85636" } }
{"authors":"Rowan Cockett::University of British Columbia--", "title":"ED53F-08: Developing, deploying and reflecting on a web-based geologic simulation tool", "abstract":"Geoscience is visual. It requires geoscientists to think and communicate about processes and events in three spatial dimensions and variations through time. This is hard(!), and students often have difficulty when learning and visualizing the three dimensional and temporal concepts. Visible Geology is an online geologic block modelling tool that is targeted at students in introductory and structural geology. With Visible Geology, students are able to combine geologic events in any order to create their own geologic models and ask ‘what-if’ questions, as well as interrogate their models using cross sections, boreholes and depth slices. Instructors use it as a simulation and communication tool in demonstrations, and students use it to explore concepts of relative geologic time, structural relationships, as well as visualize abstract geologic representations such as stereonets. The level of interactivity and creativity inherent in Visible Geology often results in a sense of ownership and encourages engagement, leading learners to practice visualization and interpretation skills and discover geologic relationships. Through its development over the last five years, Visible Geology has been used by over 300K students worldwide as well as in multiple targeted studies at the University of Calgary and at the University of British Columbia. The ease of use of the software has made this tool practical for deployment in classrooms of any size as well as for individual use. In this presentation, I will discuss the thoughts behind the implementation and layout of the tool, including a framework used for the development and design of new educational simulations. I will also share some of the surprising and unexpected observations on student interaction with the 3D visualizations, and other insights that are enabled by web-based development and deployment.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85636", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85637" } }
{"authors":"Kanani Lee::Yale University--Adam Wallenta::AWE--", "title":"ED51C-0827: Adventures of Geo: Using comics as a learning tool", "abstract":"Illustrations are a good way to visualize what is not readily seen. To take this medium a step further, we use illustrations in the form of comics as a way to teach Earth science concepts. The comic book format lends itself to engaging reading for young and old alike and has been used recently by the American Physical Society (APS) and by NASA as an outreach teaching tool. Due to their sequential nature, comic books make it easy for readers to follow a story and grasp concepts that are covered. The limited text in each panel can also help those where reading is a challenge or for those who become nervous and/or discouraged with long text passages. The illustrations also add visual clues that can aid in understanding the concepts being laid out. In the second installment of “Adventures of Geo,” we use the comic book format to introduce the Moon, its formation, evolution, orbit and its interplay with Earth. The exploration of such faraway places is readily disseminated to the public through such a graphical approach. The comic books are aimed at middle school students in the New Haven Public Schools (NHPS) where Earth Science topics are covered in the curriculum.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85637", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85638" } }
{"authors":"Katelyn Zigner::Valparaiso University--Jesse Bausell::University of California Santa Cruz--Raphael Kudela::University of California Santa Cruz--", "title":"OS23A-1989: The Impact of Climatological Variables on Kelp Canopy Area in the Santa Barbara Channel", "abstract":"Kelp canopy area (KCA), a proxy for kelp forest health, has important implications for small and large-scale processes pertaining to fisheries, near shore currents, and marine ecosystems. As part of the NASA Airborne Science Research Program (SARP), this study examines the impact of ocean chemistry and climatological variables on KCA in the Santa Barbara Channel through time series analysis. El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO), North Pacific Gyre Oscillation (NPGO), North Pacific Oscillation (NPO), and upwelling indices as well as sea surface temperature (SST), salinity, nitrate, and chlorophyll-a concentrations taken within the Santa Barbara channel (1990-2014) were acquired from the Climate Prediction Center (CPC), California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries Investigation (CalCOFI), and Di Lorenzo's NPGO websites. These data were then averaged for winter (November-January) and summer (May-August) seasons and compared to KCA measurements derived from Landsat images via unsupervised classification. Regression, cumulative sum tests, and cross-correlation coefficients revealed a two year lag between KCA and the NPGO, indicating the presence of an additional factor driving both variables. Further analyses suggests that the NPO may be this driving factor, as indicated by the correlation (lag 0) with KCA. Comparing relationships between kelp and other variables over various time periods supports the acceleration of the NPGO and other variables in more recent years. Exploring relationships between KCA, NPGO, and NPO may provide insight into potential impacts of climate change on coastal marine ecosystems.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85638", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85639" } }
{"authors":"Liane Guild::NASA Ames Research Center--Stanford Hooker::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Raphael Kudela::University of California Santa Cruz--John Morrow::Biospherical Instruments Inc--Juan Torres-Perez::NASA Ames Research Center--Sherry Palacios::NASA Ames Research Center--Kendra Negrey::University of California Santa Cruz--Jennifer Dungan::NASA Ames Research Center--", "title":"B54D-03: Bringing the Coastal Zone into Finer Focus", "abstract":"Measurements over extents from submeter to 10s of meters are critical science requirements for the design and integration of remote sensing instruments for coastal zone research. Various coastal ocean phenomena operate at different scales (e.g. meters to kilometers). For example, river plumes and algal blooms have typical extents of 10s of meters and therefore can be resolved with satellite data, however, shallow benthic ecosystem (e.g., coral, seagrass, and kelp) biodiversity and change are best studied at resolutions of submeter to meter, below the pixel size of typical satellite products. The delineation of natural phenomena do not fit nicely into gridded pixels and the coastal zone is complicated by mixed pixels at the land-sea interface with a range of bio-optical signals from terrestrial and water components. In many standard satellite products, these coastal mixed pixels are masked out because they confound algorithms for the ocean color parameter suite. In order to obtain data at the land/sea interface, finer spatial resolution satellite data can be achieved yet spectral resolution is sacrificed. This remote sensing resolution challenge thwarts the advancement of research in the coastal zone. Further, remote sensing of benthic ecosystems and shallow sub-surface phenomena are challenged by the requirements to sense through the sea surface and through a water column with varying light conditions from the open ocean to the water’s edge. For coastal waters, >80% of the remote sensing signal is scattered/absorbed due to the atmospheric constituents, sun glint from the sea surface, and water column components. In addition to in-water measurements from various platforms (e.g., ship, glider, mooring, and divers), low altitude aircraft outfitted with high quality bio-optical radiometer sensors and targeted channels matched with in-water sensors and higher altitude platform sensors for ocean color products, bridge the sea-truth measurements to the pixels acquired from satellite and high altitude platforms. We highlight a novel NASA airborne calibration, validation, and research capability for addressing the coastal remote sensing resolution challenge.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85639", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85642" } }
{"authors":"Xianyu Meng::Washington State Department of Natural Resources--Recep Cakir::Washington State Department of Natural Resources--Quinn Butler::Washington State Department of Natural Resources--John Jenkins::Washington State Department of Natural Resources--Jeff Keck::Washington State Department of Natural Resources--Timothy Walsh::WA State Dept of Natural Resources--", "title":"NS43B-1982: Locating Desired Source Rocks by Using Shallow Ground Penetrating Radar and Seismic Survey Methods in western Washington, Pacific Northwest of the U.S", "abstract":"The Washington State Department of Natural Resources (WADNR) manages 2.1 million acres of forested state trust lands in Washington. WADNR sells timber and other agricultural products to help fund local services and the construction of institutions such as public schools and universities. Quality of rocks used as a surface on the roads built to access the timber is the essential and selecting appropriate rock quarry locations is challenging. Traditional borehole drilling methods only provide information from discrete locations. The study was conducted in the Capitol Forest area of western Washington. In our previous study, we suggested that a combination of P-wave seismic and ground penetrating radar (GPR) can be a rapid, comprehensive and cost effective alternative for identifying desired rock sources. In this study, we further improved upon that method and accomplished the following: 1) rock quality at a relatively fine resolution was distinguished and 2) the spatial variability of the rock was identified. Both 450 MHz and 80 MHz GPR antennas were used to obtain high resolution radargrams in the near-surface zone with 5m maximum penetration depth and lower resolution radargrams in the deeper subsurface zone with about 20m maximum penetration depth. We then correlated the GPR radargrams with P-wave velocities using the refraction survey data as well as S-wave velocities, estimated using Multi-Channel Analysis of Surface Waves (MASW) survey data. Additionally, nearby test pits and boreholes (maximum depth = 15 meters) were used to confirm the geophysical measurements. Our study results demonstrate that the combination of GPR, using the two antennas, and seismic surveys provides very useful subsurface information regarding quality and spatial distribution of the rocks beneath the overburden. Subsurface images gathered from these combined geophysical methods do assist quarry operators to rapidly locate the desired rock sources.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85642", "section":"Near Surface Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85643" } }
{"authors":"Zoe Nichols::University of Alabama--Shallin Busch::NOAA--Paul McElhany::NOAA--", "title":"OS13A-2034: Metabolic Response of Dungeness Crab Larvae Exposed to Elevated CO2 and Hypoxia", "abstract":"Ocean acidification (OA) and deoxygenation, both resulting from rising atmospheric CO2 levels, are lowering the pH and oxygen levels of global oceans. Assessing the impacts of OA and deoxygenation on harvested species is crucial for guiding resource management with the aim of maintaining healthy and sustainable populations. The Dungeness crab, Cancer magister, is an important species ecologically and economically for the US West Coast. Crabs transition through four main stages: zoea, megalopa, juvenile, and adult. Each stage results in a different morphology and behavior, and as a result, is exposed to various environmental parameters, such as pH and dissolved oxygen (DO). The first two stages exhibit diel vertical migration while the final stages are benthic. Our study focused on the megalopae stage and their metabolic response to OA and hypoxia. We exposed wild-caught megalopae to a pH x DO cross, producing treatment waters with combinations of low or high pH and O2, all maintained at 12˚C. Closed-chamber respirometry was used to compare standard metabolic rates in a common garden setting with high pH/high DO conditions. We predict that the megalopae exposed to the low pH/high DO treatment will have a higher metabolic rate than those exposed to the high pH/high DO treatment. This may be a result of homeostatic processes increasing to return the megalopae’s internal pH back to equilibrium. We predict that the high pH/low DO treatment will cause a decrease in metabolism when compared to the high pH/high DO treatment due to the megalopae conserving oxygen in a limiting environment. If results support our hypothesis, they would suggest that OA and hypoxia affects Dungeness crabs in sublethal ways.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85643", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85644" } }
{"authors":"Shelby Scola::Providence College--Jason Schroeder::University of California Irvine--Donald Blake::University of California Irvine--", "title":"A21A-0069: Using Positive Matrix Factorization to Investigate Sources of VOCs in Bakersfield", "abstract":"Bakersfield, California consistently ranks among the nation's top three most polluted cities in terms of both ozone and particulate pollution. An important step in developing control strategies for the mitigation of ozone is determining the contribution of various emission sources of ozone precursors, such as volatile organic compounds (VOCs), in Bakersfield. During the SARP 2015 campaign, whole air samples were collected over Bakersfield and other Central Valley emission sources - including oil and natural gas sites and agricultural areas - and analyzed by gas chromatography. To estimate the influence of oil and natural gas sources on air in Bakersfield, the ratio of i-pentane to n-pentane was used. Use of this ratio demonstrated mixed urban and oil and natural gas influences in the Bakersfield samples. To better identify and quantify the contributions of oil and natural gas fields as well as other regional emission sources on Bakersfield air quality, positive matrix factorization (PMF) was applied to whole air samples taken within the planetary boundary layer in the Central Valley. PMF generated three interpretable factors: an urban source, an oil and natural gas source, and an agricultural/biogenically-influenced source. The contribution of each of the three sources on the mixing ratios of C1-C7 alkanes and isoprene was calculated. Of the non-methane VOCs in Bakersfield, it was determined that 45% originated from the oil and natural gas sites, 34% from the agriculture/biogenically-influenced sources, and 21% from urban areas. Furthermore, it was observed that there was a better agreement between PMF results and propane to ethyne ratios than with i-pentane to n-pentane ratios.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85644", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85645" } }
{"authors":"Moulay Anwar Sounny-Slitine::Southwestern University University of Texas at Austin--Edgardo Latrubesse::University of Texas at Austin--", "title":"EP51A-0898: Morphometry and Geomorphic Characteristics of Large Alluvial fans and Megafans in South America", "abstract":"Alluvial megafans are ‘large’ fan-shaped bodies of sediment that form from lateral migrations of a river as it exits a topographic front. They differ from large alluvial fans (radial length between 30-100km) with sizes greater than 100-km in radial length. This study characterizes and describes megafans and large alluvial fan through morphometrics. We cataloged the fans into a geodatabase delineating size and extent of basins both upstream and downstream from the apex. Through remote sensing, elevation modeling and geomorphic mapping, we populated the database with fan morphometric measurements, qualitative descriptions and basin parameters. Metrics include planform area, catchment area, gradient, relief index, drainage density, and others. These were compared to longitudinal/transverse profiles, satellite imagery, and geomorphic maps. The database is global, however since the largest megafans of the world are located in South America, this preliminary analysis will focus on the continent. We found morphometric and characteristic differences between large alluvial fans and megafans in the region. These include difference in relationship between morphometrics, for example the ratio between catchment and fan size area. These properties of fans could be a better approach in differentiating megafans from large alluvial fans. The current criteria is an artificial scale divide, which varies in the literature, with the most common being a 100-km apex-to-toe length. Alternative values as little of 30-km apex-to-toe length have been proposed, as well as alternative metrics like coverage areas of greater than 10,000 square-km. We propose that geomorphic characteristics and morphometrics provide an intrinsic approach to differentiating megafans from larger alluvial fans.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85645", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85646" } }
{"authors":"Martin Claverie::University of Maryland College Park NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Junchang Ju::Universities Space Research Association Columbia--Jeffrey Masek::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Eric Vermote::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Christopher Justice::University of Maryland College Park--", "title":"B43A-0541: A Harmonized Landsat-Sentinel-2 Surface Reflectance product: a resource for Agricultural Monitoring", "abstract":"The combination of Landsat and Sentinel-2 data offers a unique opportunity to observe globally the land every 2-3 days at medium (<30m) spatial resolution. The Harmonized Landsat-Sentinel-2 (HLS) project is a NASA initiative aiming to produce surface reflectance data from Landsat and Sentinel-2 missions and to deliver them to the community in a combined, seamless form. The HLS will be beneficial for global agricultural monitoring applications that require medium spatial resolution and weekly or more frequent observations. In particular, the provided opportunity to track crop phenology at the scale of individual fields will support detailed mapping of crop type and type-specific vegetation conditions. To create a compatible set of radiometric measurements, the HLS product relies on rigorous pre- and post-launch cross-calibration (Landsat-8 OLI and Sentinel-2 MSI) activities. The processing chain includes the following components: atmospheric correction, cloud/shadow masking, nadir BRDF-adjustment, spectral-adjustment, regridding, and temporal composite. The atmospheric correction and cloud masking is based on the OLI atmospheric correction developed at NASA-GSFC and has been adapted to the MSI data. The BRDF-adjustment is based on a disaggregation technique using MODIS-based BRDF coefficients. The technique has been evaluated using the multi-angular acquisition from the SPOT 4 and 5 (Take5) experiments. The spectral-adjustment relies on a linear regression that has been calibrated and evaluated using synthetic data and surface reflectance processed from a large number of hyperspectral EO-1 Hyperion scenes. Finally, significant effort is placed on product validation and evaluation. The delivered data set will include surface reflectance products at different levels: Using the native gridding, i.e. UTM, 30m for Landsat-8, and UTM, 10-20m for Sentinel-2 Using a common global gridding (Sinusoidal, 30m) Temporal composite (Sinusoidal, 30m, 5-day) During the first year of operation of Sentinel-2A, the HLS will be prototyped over a selection of 30 sites that includes some of the JECAM sites, Aeronet sites and Cal/Val sites. Then, the HLS spatial coverage will be increased as more Sentinel-2A data become available.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85646", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85647" } }
{"authors":"Nathan Thorp::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--R. Wieder::Villanova University--Melanie Vile::Villanova University--", "title":"B13G-0708: Nitrogen Inputs via Nitrogen Fixation in Northern Plants and Soils", "abstract":"Dominated by cold and often acidic water logged environments, mineralization of organic matter is slow in the majority of northern ecosystems. Measures of extractable ammonium and nitrate are generally low and can be undetectable in peat pore waters. Despite this apparent nitrogen limitation, many of these environments produce deep deposits of soil organic matter. Biological nitrogen fixation carried out by autotrophic and heterotrophic diazotrophs associated with cryptograms provides the majority of known nitrogen inputs in these northern ecosystems. Nitrogen fixation was assessed in a variety of northern soils within rhizospheres of dominant plant communities. We investigated the availability of this newly fixed nitrogen to the vascular plant community in nitrogen limited northern plant communities. We tracked nitrogen flow from 15N2 gas fixed in Sphagnum mosses into tissues of two native vascular plant species, boreal cranberry (Vaccinium oxycoccus) and black spruce (Picea mariana). 15N-labeled Sphagnum microcosms were grown within variable mesh size exclusion/inclusion fabrics in a nitrogen addition experiment in situ in order to investigate the role of mycorrhizal fungi in the uptake of newly fixed nitrogen.  Up to 24% of daily fixed 15N label was transferred to vascular plant tissues during 2 months. Nitrogen addition resulted in decreased N2 fixation rates; however, with higher nitrogen availability there was a higher rate of 15N label uptake into the vascular plants, likely the result of increased production of dissolved organic nitrogen. Reliance on mycorrhizal networks for nitrogen acquisition was indicated by nitrogen isotope fractionation patterns. Moreover, N2 fixation activities in mosses were stimulated when vascular plants were grown in moss microcosms versus “moss only” treatments. Results indicate that bog vascular plants may derive considerable nitrogen from atmospheric N2 biologically fixed within Sphagnum mosses. This work demonstrates that diazotroph-mediated 15N labeling is a viable technique for tracking nitrogen flow without altering form and concentration of native nitrogen pools in a nitrogen limited ecosystem.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85647", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85648" } }
{"authors":"Simon Goring::University of Wisconsin Madison--John Williams::University of Wisconsin--Ellen Kujawa::University of Wisconsin Madison--Andria Dawson::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"GC11E-1065: Vegetation and Pollen signals of the Anthropocene: Changing signals, changing scales", "abstract":"The signals of the onset of Euro-American settlement in North America are clear and pervasive, but there is a disconnect between pollen and vegetation signals, both prior to and following EuroAmerican settlement. Vegetation shifts with respect to climate are induced by biased land use patterns in the upper Midwestern United States, but because pollen can be transported long distances, and because the granularity of the pollen signal, obtained from lake sediments and interpolated across the landscape, is often much lower than for forest and land cover data, the apparent influence of climate in structuring vegetation is much stronger for pollen than for vegetation. We examine the impacts of widespread human land use on taxon boundaries in the northeastern United States, both prior to widespread EuroAmerican Settlement and under modern conditions, for both pollen and forest cover and compare these distributions and the forest community ecotones to climate and physiographic features. We show that following EuroAmerican settlement vegetation ecotone sensitivity to both climate and physiography is much weaker than prior to settlement, while for pollen climate remains the dominant driver, but the presence of cosmopolitan “weedy” taxa produces a landscape that is more homogeneous, and again shows weaker sensitivity to climate and physiographic thresholds. The drivers for decreased sentitivity are largely the result of broad-scale homogenization, the overall loss of strong vegetation ecotones in the region. Pollen is less sensitive to this decline because the influence of heavy producers has already resulted in an apparent homogenization of the landscape. This has implications for past land-cover reconstruction and our understanding of the strengths of climate and physiography in structuring vegetation cover over long time scales.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85648", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85649" } }
{"authors":"Kenji Hirata::National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention--Hiroyuki Fujiwara::National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention--Hiromitsu Nakamura::NIED--Masaki Osada::NIED National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention--Nobuyuki Morikawa::NIED National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention--Shin'ichi Kawai::NIED--Tatsuo Ohsumi::NIED--Shin Aoi::National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention--Naotaka Yamamoto::National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention--Hisanori Matsuyama::OYO Corporation--Nobuhiko Toyama::OYO Corporation--Tadashi Kito::OYO Corporation--Yoichi Murashima::KKC--Yasuhiro Murata::KOKUSAI KOGYO CO., LTD--Takuya Inoue::KOKUSAI KOGYO CO., LTD--Ryu Saito::KOKUSAI KOGYO CO., LTD--Jyunpei Takayama::KOKUSAI KOGYO CO., LTD--Shinichi Akiyama::ITOCHU Techno-Solutions Corporation--Mariko Korenaga::ITOCHU Techno-Solutions Corporation--Yuta Abe::ITOCHU Techno-Solutions Corporation--Norihiko Hashimoto::ITOCHU Techno-Solutions Corporation--", "title":"NH13D-1962: Probabilistic Tsunami Hazard Assessment along Nankai Trough (1) An assessment based on the information of the forthcoming earthquake that Earthquake Research Committee(2013) evaluated", "abstract":"The Earthquake Research Committee(ERC)/HERP, Government of Japan (2013) revised their long-term evaluation of the forthcoming large earthquake along the Nankai Trough; the next earthquake is estimated M8 to 9 class, and the probability (P30) that the next earthquake will occur within the next 30 years (from Jan. 1, 2013) is 60% to 70%. In this study, we assess tsunami hazards (maximum coastal tsunami heights) in the near future, in terms of a probabilistic approach, from the next earthquake along Nankai Trough, on the basis of ERC(2013)’s report. The probabilistic tsunami hazard assessment that we applied is as follows; (1) Characterized earthquake fault models (CEFMs) are constructed on each of the 15 hypothetical source areas (HSA) that ERC(2013) showed. The characterization rule follows Toyama et al.(2015, JpGU). As results, we obtained total of 1441 CEFMs. (2) We calculate tsunamis due to CEFMs by solving nonlinear, finite-amplitude, long-wave equations with advection and bottom friction terms by finite-difference method. Run-up computation on land is included. (3) A time predictable model predicts the recurrent interval of the present seismic cycle is T=88.2 years (ERC,2013). We fix P30 = 67% by applying the renewal process based on BPT distribution with T and alpha=0.24 as its aperiodicity. (4) We divide the probability P30 into P30(i) for i-th subgroup consisting of the earthquakes occurring in each of 15 HSA by following a probability re-distribution concept (ERC,2014). Then each earthquake (CEFM) in i-th subgroup is assigned a probability P30(i)/N where N is the number of CEFMs in each sub-group. Note that such re-distribution concept of the probability is nothing but tentative because the present seismology cannot give deep knowledge enough to do it. Epistemic logic-tree approach may be required in future. (5) We synthesize a number of tsunami hazard curves at every evaluation points on coasts by integrating the information about 30 years occurrence probabilities P30(i) for all earthquakes (CEFMs) and calculated maximum coastal tsunami heights. In the synthesis, aleatory uncertainties relating to incompleteness of governing equations, CEFM modeling, bathymetry and topography data, etc, are modeled assuming a log-normal probabilistic distribution. Examples of tsunami hazard curves will be presented.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85649", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85650" } }
{"authors":"Valeriu Murgulet::Texas A & M University Corpus Christi--Dorina Murgulet::Texas A & M University Corpus Christi--Richard Hay::Texas A & M University Corpus Christi--", "title":"H31G-1521: Groundwater Discharge and Salinity Sources to an Impaired Major River in a Semi-Arid Coastal Region: Nueces River, Texas", "abstract":"Nueces River, an impaired stream located on the South Texas Gulf coast area, has shown water quality degradation due to to increased salinity levels in areas adjacent to the Calallen saltwater reservoir dam. This study investigates the role of submarine groundwater discharge in delivering increased salt contents to the river and how the subsurface hydrology is affected by the presence of a salt barrier (i.e. saltwater dam) which separates the tidal and non-tidal parts of the Nueces river basin. Thus, a combination of resistivity profiling and elemental and stable isotope geochemistry methods has been applied to portions of the river located downstream (tidal) and upstream (non-tidal) of the dam. Preliminary data show that salinity levels gradually increases at the river bank indicating that groundwater is likely a source of solutes to the river in the upper, non-tidal portion. The presence of vertical upwelling of conductive groundwater plumes is also revealed by marine resistivity profiles collected along the river. Different sampling during the spring and summer of 2014 show higher concentration values of major ions (i.e., calcium, magnesium, sodium, potassium, chloride, etc.) and salinity of pore water for the upstream river at several locations while it remains relatively constant for bottom- and surface water. In addition, because the groundwater and porewater have slightly lower pH values, a shift to more acidic surface water accompanied by some increases in dissolved major ion concentrations and salinity suggest that groundwater might represent a source of increased salt content in the upper portion of the river. On the other hand, downstream dissolved major ion concentrations generally decrease in pore- and bottom water from spring to summer and are correlated with decreases in salinity while surface water becomes more saline with an increase in major ions. Therefore, these preliminary data indicate different hydrology systems of the two portions of the river, the likely different sources of groundwater discharge and that terrestrial groundwater discharge rather than recirculated water is a source of increased salinity in the upper portion of the river while it may supply freshwater to the lower part.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85650", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85651" } }
{"authors":"Khaled Ghannam::Duke University--Tomer Duman::Duke University--Scott Salesky::University of British Columbia--Marcelo Chamecki::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--Gabriel Katul::Duke University--", "title":"A52B-08: Closure of the heat flux budget with the ejection-sweep cycle in the convective atmospheric boundary layer", "abstract":"The inadequacy of conventional gradient-diffusion in modeling scalar fluxes within the convective atmospheric boundary-layer is often alleviated by accounting for nonlocal transport effects, such as Deardorff’s counter-gradient hypothesis, Wyngaard’s transport asymmetry closures, or mass-flux parametrizations. Such nonlocal effects are a manifestation of the inherent asymmetry in vertical transport, which is in turn associated with third-order moments (skewness and fluxes of fluxes). In this work, we examine the role of the turbulent transport term in the sensible heat flux budget within the convective boundary layer, with the principal aim of reconciling the aforementioned models to various closure assumptions of this term. In particular, by connecting turbulent heat transport and the ejection-sweep events in the flow field, we establish a generic framework upon which such closure models can be derived. These ejections and sweeps are tied to third-order moments (asymmetry) in the Gram-Charlier cumulant expansion of the joint probability distribution of vertical velocity and potential temperature. The heat flux budget is solved under several assumptions on closure timescales, skewness profiles, and relations between the mixed third-order moments to recover the necessary conditions for adequate vertical profile of the heat flux. The surface layer scaling laws and their contribution to turbulence fluxes is also included and discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85651", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85652" } }
{"authors":"Richard Kraus::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--Jean-Paul Davis::Sandia National Laboratory--Christopher Seagle::Sandia National Laboratory--Dayne Fratanduono::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--Damian Swift::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--Jon Eggert::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--Gilbert Collins::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--", "title":"MR13C-2722: Ramp Compression of Copper and a Pressure Standard to 450 GPa", "abstract":"Diamond anvil cell pressure standards such as copper, tungsten, gold, and platinum are calibrated by reducing Hugoniot data to an isentrope or isotherm using a model for the thermal pressure. At pressures below the bulk modulus of the sample, the correction for the thermal pressure is relatively small and therefore the uncertainties in the thermal model are not significant. However, as stresses in diamond anvil cells are achieving pressures of 4-10 Mbar, reducing Hugoniot data to an isotherm requires a tremendous thermal pressure correction and uncertainties in the reduced isotherm are unconstrained. Here we present ramp-wave compression experiments at the Sandia Z-Machine that we use to constrain the equation of state of copper to a stress state of nearly 5 Mbar. We use the iterative Lagrangian analysis technique, developed by Rothman and Maw, to determine the stress-strain path. We correct for the plastic work heating and the deviatoric stress contribution to the stress-density measurement to obtain an isentrope. Our measured isentrope compares well with our shock-wave reduced isentrope at low pressures and provides an accurate pressure standard for diamond anvil cells at extreme conditions. This work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85652", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85653" } }
{"authors":"Kristofer Covey::Yale University--Thomas Crowther::Yale University--Henry Glick::Yale University--Charles Bettigole::Yale University--Mark Bradford::Yale University--", "title":"B12C-04: Mapping Tree Density at the Global Scale", "abstract":"The global extent and distribution of forest trees is central to our understanding of the terrestrial biosphere. We provide the first spatially continuous map of forest tree density at a global-scale. This map reveals that the global number of trees is approximately 3.04 trillion, an order of magnitude higher than the previous estimate. Of these trees, approximately 1.39 trillion exist in tropical and subtropical regions, with 0.74, and 0.61 trillion in boreal and temperate regions, respectively. Biome-level trends in tree density demonstrate the importance of climate and topography in controlling local tree densities at finer scales, as well as the overwhelming impact of humans across most of the world. Based on our projected tree densities, we estimate that deforestation is currently responsible for removing over 15 billion trees each year, and the global number of trees has fallen by approximately 46% since the start of human civilization.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85653", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85654" } }
{"authors":"Stephanie Ross::USGS--Nathan Wood::Western Geographic Science Center--Dale Cox::USGS Headquarters--Lucile Jones::USGS Pasadena Field Office--Kwok Fai Cheung::University of Hawaii at Manoa--Gary Chock::Martin & Chock, Inc.--Kara Gately::NOAA National Weather Service--Jamie Jones::U.S. Geological Survey--Patrick Lynett::University of Southern California--Kevin Miller::California Office of Emergency Services--Dmitry Nicolsky::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Kevin Richards::Hawai’I Emergency Management agency--Anne Wein::USGS Western Regional Offices Menlo Park--Rick Wilson::California Geological Survey Sacramento--", "title":"NH23C-1895: SAFRR Tsunami Scenarios and USGS-NTHMP Collaboration", "abstract":"Hazard scenarios provide emergency managers and others with information to help them prepare for future disasters. The SAFRR Tsunami Scenario, published in 2013, modeled a hypothetical but plausible tsunami, created by an Mw9.1 earthquake occurring offshore from the Alaskan peninsula, and its impacts on the California coast. It presented the modeled inundation areas, current velocities in key ports and harbors, physical damage and repair costs, economic consequences, environmental impacts, social vulnerability, emergency management, and policy implications for California associated with the scenario tsunami. The intended users were those responsible for making mitigation decisions before and those who need to make rapid decisions during future tsunamis. It provided the basis for many exercises involving, among others, NOAA, the State of Washington, several counties in California, and the National Institutes of Health. The scenario led to improvements in the warning protocol for southern California and highlighted issues that led to ongoing work on harbor and marina safety. Building on the lessons learned in the SAFRR Tsunami Scenario, another tsunami scenario is being developed with impacts to Hawaii and to the source region in Alaska, focusing on the evacuation issues of remote communities with primarily shore parallel roads, and also on the effects of port closures. Community exposure studies in Hawaii (Ratliff et al., USGS-SIR, 2015) provided background for selecting these foci. One complicated and important aspect of any hazard scenario is defining the source event. The USGS is building collaborations with the National Tsunami Hazard Mitigation Program (NTHMP) to consider issues involved in developing a standardized set of tsunami sources to support hazard mitigation work. Other key USGS-NTHMP collaborations involve population vulnerability and evacuation modeling.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85654", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85655" } }
{"authors":"Coltin Grasmick::University of Northern Colorado--Raphael Kudela::University of California Santa Cruz--Jesse Bausell::University of California Santa Cruz--", "title":"OS53B-2020: The Effects of Changing Climatological Variables on Upwelling along the Southern California Coast", "abstract":"A large part of the high productivity of CA current ecosystems can be attributed to Ekman upwelling of cold, nutrient-rich water, driven by north winds running parallel to shore. As meteorological (e.g. wind direction and velocity, atmospheric pressure fields, etc.) and oceanographic (e.g. sea surface temperature) parameters change in the context of climate change, it is unclear how ecosystems and the coastal upwelling on which they depend, will be impacted. To better understand the effects of meteorological and oceanographic forcing on coastal upwelling, eleven years (2005-2015) of data were taken from satellites, weather stations and data-collecting buoys located in and around the Santa Barbara Channel as part of the NASA Student Airborne Research Program (SARP). These data were then analyzed using regression and time-series cross-correlation statistics in order to identify trends in meteorological and oceanographic cycles, their relationship to localized upwelling (e.g. upwelling indices), and how climate change may impact upwelling. Results indicate that as temperature has increased over the last four years (as a result of the 'warm blob'), upwelling has decreased. They also indicate differences in the annual cycles of cross-shore pressure gradients during years of poor versus years when upwelling conditions are favorable. This documented dependence of the coastal wind on sea surface temperature could have important implications as our oceans change; elevated sea surface temperatures, such as those associated with the 'warm blob', may result in less coastal upwelling and lower ecosystem productivity.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85655", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85656" } }
{"authors":"Jianqi Qin::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Farzad Kamalabadi::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Jonathan Makela::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Robert Meier::Organization Not Listed--", "title":"SA13B-2371: Accurate Quantification of Ionospheric State Based on Comprehensive Radiative Transfer Modeling and Optimal Inversion of the OI 135.6-nm Emission", "abstract":"Remote sensing of the nighttime OI 135.6-nm emission represents the primary means of quantifying the F-region ionospheric state from optical measurements. Despite its pervasive use for studying aeronomical processes, the interpretation of these emissions as a proxy for ionospheric state remains ambiguous in that the relative contributions of radiative recombination and mutual neutralization to the production and, especially, the effects of scattering and absorption on the transport of the 135.6-nm emissions have not been fully quantified. Moreover, an inversion algorithm, which is robust to varying ionospheric structures under different geophysical conditions, is yet to be developed for statistically optimal characterization of the ionospheric state. In this work, as part of the NASA ICON mission, we develop a comprehensive radiative transfer model from first principle to investigate the production and transport of the nighttime 135.6-nm emissions. The forward modeling investigation indicates that under certain conditions mutual neutralization can contribute up to ~38% to the 135.6-nm emissions. Moreover, resonant scattering and pure absorption can reduce the brightness observed in the limb direction by ~40% while enhancing the brightness in the nadir direction by ~25%. Further analysis shows that without properly addressing these effects in the inversion process, the peak electron density in the F-region ionosphere (NmF2) can be overestimated by up to ~24%. To address these issues, an inversion algorithm that properly accounts for the above-mentioned effects is proposed for accurate quantification of the ionospheric state using satellite measurements. The ill-posedness due to the intrinsic presence of noise in real data is coped with by incorporating proper regularizations that enforce either global smoothness or piecewise smoothness of the solution. Application to model-generated data with different signal-to-noise ratios show that the algorithm has achieved unprecedented accuracy in estimating the electron density, with only a few percentage errors in Nmf2 and a few kilometer differences in hmf2. The inversion is also demonstrated to be robust to different geophysical conditions, in which the electron density profile can be distinctly different from a smooth Chapman profile.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85656", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85657" } }
{"authors":"Dominique Maier::Umeå University--", "title":"PP12A-02: Improved understanding of Diatom stratigraphy in a varved sediment through a sediment trap, lake monitoring and a catchment study", "abstract":"Biological sediment remains reflect past lake surrounding conditions. Potential drivers of change in the biological sediment proxy can be environmental contributors like weather and temperature changes as well as man-made such as developments in agriculture and forestry. However we don’t know how these different factors contribute to the biological sediment signal. Here we are monitoring a boreal lake with a varved sediment to understand how the biological signal of diatom remains is formed in the annually layered sediment. We compare the diatom stratigraphy with a sequential sediment trap. For a deeper understanding of the underlying mechanisms we look at three full years of bi-weekly monitoring of physical, chemical and biological parameters and 15 years of water stratification data. We seek to link the monitored in-lake processes with the yearly environmental characteristics. The diatom sediment stratigraphy of the two most abundant species Asterionella formosa and Fragilaria delicatissima indicates three periods with a contrasting trend for both species from 1975 until 2014. In the first period Asterionella formosa is almost not abundant spanning one decade (1975-1985), reaching elevated abundance with a decreasing trend in period 2 over the following 17 years to be followed by a tripling of Asterionella fromosa remains in the sediment during the third period. The opposite trend is found for Fragilaria delicatissima. Linking the recorded data with the corresponding sediment stratigraphy allows us to distinguish between weather changes and catchment disturbances as potential drivers for changes in a sedimentary diatom signal.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85657", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85658" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"GC53E-1256: Regime-based forecast performance during WFIP 1", "abstract":"The principal objectives of the first Wind Forecast Improvement Project (WFIP 1) were to improve short-term (0 - 6 hr) wind power forecasts through the assimilation of targeted remote sensing and surface observations with an enhanced model ensemble forcast system. The WFIP 1 field deployment/modeling campaign in the Southern Study Area (SSA--encompassing most of central and western Texas) ran from August 2011 through Septembe 2012. This ensured observational data and model output for all representative weather regimes affecting the SSA. Cold and warm season regimes featured synoptic-scale, convective, and low-level jet (LLJ) phenomena that are responsible for the favorable wind resource in the SSA, and also posed a challenge for assigning specific explanations for the observed forecast improvements (e.g. additional observations, model improvements, or a combination of both). LLJs produced hourly capacity factors exceeding 80% in aggregated wind farm power production, while synoptic-scale systems were responsible for the largest ramp events observed during WFIP 1. Accurately forecasting convective phenomena (such as outflow boundaries) during WFIP 1 was at times problematic. Here, we present regime-based and phenomenological-related forecast performance results for WFIP 1. These performance metrics suggest future research pathways that will facilitate improvements in operational wind power forecasts.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85658", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85660" } }
{"authors":"Dalton Hardisty::University of California Riverside--Zunli Lu::Syracuse University--Peter Swart::University of Miami--Noah Planavsky::Yale University--Benjamin Gill::Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University--Sean Loyd::California State University Fullerton--Timothy Lyons::University of California Riverside--", "title":"PP31B-2254: Assessing potential diagenetic alteration of primary iodine-to-calcium ratios in carbonate rocks", "abstract":"We have evaluated iodine-to-calcium (I/Ca) ratios from a series of carbonate samples with well-constrained histories of diagenetic alteration to assess the likelihood of overprints on primary water column-derived signals. Because only the oxidized iodine species, iodate, is incorporated during carbonate precipitation, I/Ca ratios have strong potential as proxies for both marine redox and carbon cycling. This utility lies with the combination of iodate’s redox sensitivity as well as the close association between iodine and marine organic matter. However, despite the possibility of large pore water iodine enrichments relative to overlying seawater, carbonate alteration under reducing diagenetic conditions, and iodate-to-iodide reduction, no study has assessed the prospect of diagenetic alteration of primary I/Ca ratios. Here, we evaluated aragonite-to-calcite transformations and dolomitization within the Key Largo Limestone of South Florida and the Clino and Unda drill cores of the Bahamas Bank. Also, early burial diagenesis was studied through analysis of I/Ca ratios in short cores from a variety of shallow settings within the Exuma Bay, Bahamas. Further, we evaluated authigenic carbonates through analysis of iodine in concretions constrained to have formed during varying stages of evolving pore fluid chemistry. In all cases, I/Ca ratios show the potential for diagenetic iodine loss relative to water-column derived values, consistent with observations of quantitative reduction of dissolved iodate to iodide in pore waters before or synchronous with carbonate alteration. In no case, however, did we observe an increase in I/Ca during diagenetic transformation. Our results suggest both that primary I/Ca values and trends can be preserved but that maximum I/Ca ratios should be considered a minimum estimate of seawater iodate. We recommend that ancient carbonates with distinct I/Ca trends not indicative of diagenetic iodine loss reflect preservation of or very early diagenetic alteration of primary mineralogies.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85660", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85661" } }
{"authors":"Julia Carlstad::University of Washington Seattle Campus--Jason Schroeder::University of California Irvine--Andreas Beyersdorf::NASA Langley Research Center--Donald Blake::University of California Irvine--", "title":"A13F-07: Analysis of Hydroxyl Radical Reactivity in the Sierra Nevada Mountains", "abstract":"Using the UC Irvine Whole Air Sampler, volatile organic compounds (VOCs) were measured onboard the NASA DC-8 during the Student Airborne Research Program. High levels of ozone were observed near the surface over the Sierra Nevada mountains, and VOC data was used to investigate factors that contributed to ozone production. This was done by calculating the hydroxyl radical reactivity, which can, in proper conditions, be used to predict ozone formation potential. The region was divided into three boxes from east to west, based on wind direction, and the reactivity was analyzed over each region with respect to methane, non-methane alkanes, alkenes, aromatics, and biogenic compounds. In the westernmost box the reactivity was 1.7 ± 0.5 s-1 (1σ), in the middle section it was 1.4 ± 1 s-1, and in the easternmost region it was 0.8 ± 0.3 s-1. The data were compared with a region known to be heavily polluted, the Los Angeles (LA) basin, and it was observed that the reactivity was 1.1 ± 0.6 s-1, lower than in two of the mountainous regions. In the Sierra Nevada mountains a major percentage of the hydroxyl radical reactivity was the result of biogenic influence, at 24% for the western box, 39% for the middle box, and 31% for the easternmost box, in contrast to only 2% biogenic contribution in LA. This indicates that biogenic factors greatly contributed to overall ozone formation in the Sierra Nevada mountains. These mountains are strategically protected, and high pollution levels could lead to health impacts for visitors, vegetation, and wildlife.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85661", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85662" } }
{"authors":"Maura Dewey::University of Victoria--Colin Goldblatt::University of Victoria--", "title":"PP33B-2308: Empirical Quantification of the Runaway Greenhouse Limit on Earth", "abstract":"There have been many modeling studies of the runaway greenhouse effect and the conditions required to produce one on an Earth-like planet, however these models have not been verified with empirical evidence. It has been suggested that the Earth’s tropics may be near a state of localized runaway greenhouse, meaning the surface temperature and atmospheric composition in those areas could cause runaway greenhouse, were it not for the tempering effects of meridional heat transport and circulation (Pierrehumbert, 1995). Using the assumption that some areas of the Earth’s tropics may be under these conditions, this study uses measurements of the atmospheric properties, surface properties, and radiation budgets of these areas to quantify a radiation limit for runaway greenhouse on Earth, by analyzing the dependence of outgoing longwave radiation (OLR) at the top of the atmosphere on surface temperature and total column water vapour. An upper limit on OLR for clear-sky conditions was found between 289.8 W/m2 and 292.2 W/m2, which occurred at surface temperatures near 300K. For surface temperatures above this threshold, total column water vapour increased, but OLR initially decreased and then remained relatively constant, between 273.6 W/m2 and 279.7 W/m2. These limits are in good agreement with recent modeling results (Goldblatt et al., 2013), supporting the idea that some of the Earth’s tropics may be in localized runaway greenhouse, and that radiation limits for runaway greenhouse on Earth can be empirically derived. This research was done as part of Maura Dewey’s undergraduate honours thesis at the University of Victoria. Refs: Robert T. Pierrehumbert. Thermostats, radiator fins, and the local runaway greenhouse. Journal of Atmospheric Sciences, 52(10):1784-1806, 1995. Colin Goldblatt, Tyler D. Robinson, Kevin J. Zahnle, and David Crisp. Low simulated radiation limit for runaway greenhouse climates. Nature Geoscience, 6:661-667, 2013.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85662", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85663" } }
{"authors":"Don Hassler::Southwest Research Institute Boulder--", "title":"SH21B-2418: Space Weather Measurements from the Surface of Mars with the RAD Instrument on the Mars Science Laboratory", "abstract":"The Radiation Assessment Detector (RAD) is a compact, lightweight energetic particle analyzer currently operating on the surface of Mars as part of the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) Mission. RAD is providing the first measurements of the energetic particle radiation environment on the surface of another planet due to solar flares, coronal mass ejections (CMEs), and galactic cosmic rays (GCRs). RAD is providing synoptic measurements of the energetic particle environment at a 2nd location in heliosphere (other than near-Earth or L1), and will aid heliospheric modeling over solar cycle. These observations of SEP fluxes are contributing to a solar energetic particle (SEP) event database at Mars and the Martian surface to aid prediction of Solar Particle Events (SPEs), including onset, temporal & size predictions. This presentation will provide an overview of the RAD investigation and present measurements of the solar flare, GCR and radiation environment on the surface of Mars, and discuss the importance of providing broad heliospheric coverage for situational awareness of space weather as we plan to send humans out into deep space and to Mars. RAD is supported by NASA (HEOMD) under JPL subcontract #1273039 to SwRI, and by DLR in Germany under contract with Christian-Albrechts-Universitat (CAU).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85663", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85664" } }
{"authors":"Anyi Hu::IUE Institute of Urban Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Chang-Ping Yu::IUE Institute of Urban Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Liyuan Hou::IUE Institute of Urban Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences--", "title":"B11E-0488: Spatial and temporal dynamics of microbial communities in a human-perturbed estuary of China", "abstract":"Estuaries are responsible for the transport and transformation of nutrients and organic matters from the continent to the adjacent coastal zone, and therefore play critical roles in global biogeochemical cycles. They are under increasing stress from human activities, especially in China, yet we still know little about the responses of microbial communities that mediate biogeochemical processes. Here, we investigated planktonic and benthic microbial communities in the human-perturbed Jiulong River estuary (JRE), southern China by using Illumina 16S ribosomal RNA amplicon sequencing. The results of taxonomic assignments indicated that Beta- (23.32%), Alpha- (22.21%), Gammaproteobacteria (14.83%), Actinobacteria (8.67%), and Flavobacteria (7.56%) were the five most abundant classes in estuarine surface waters, while benthic microbial communities were dominated by Gamma- (20.09%), Delta- (14.68%), Beta- (9.82%), Alphaproteobacteria (7.63%), and Anaerolineae (7.25%). The results of Adnois and ANOSIM tests confirmed that the compositions of microbial communities from waters and sediments of the JRE were significantly different from each other, and then salinity may be the primary factor controlling spatial distributions of planktonic and benthic microbial communities in this estuary. At the temporal scale, planktonic communities showed a more clear variation pattern. Remarkably, the ratios of Thaumarchaeota (putative ammonia-oxidizing archaea) to Nitrosomonadales (ammonia-oxidizing bacteria) either in water or sediments of the JRE increased from freshwater to marine end, suggesting that bacterial and archaeal nitrifiers occupy low-salinity and high-salinity niches, respectively. The nutrient concentrations and salinity might be the most important factors which are responsible for this niche diversification. Overall, this study shed light on our understanding of the biogeographic patterns and its ecological drivers of estuarine microbial communities.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85664", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85665" } }
{"authors":"Brandon Overstreet::University of Wyoming--Carl Legleiter::University of Wyoming--Lee Harrison::NOAA Santa Barbara--Lincoln Pitcher::University of California Los Angeles--Jonathan Ryan::Aberystwyth University--Asa Rennermalm::Rutgers University New Brunswick--Laurence Smith::University of California Los Angeles--", "title":"H41E-1366: Multiscale controls on water surface roughness and implications for remote sensing of rivers", "abstract":"Remote sensing has emerged as a viable and efficient tool for studying river systems and facilitating their rehabilitation. While many remote sensing applications utilize spectral information from the substrate and water column, light reflected from the water surface is often a significant component of the total at-sensor radiance. As water surface roughness (WSR) increases, a greater proportion of surface facets become oriented so as to reflect, rather than transmit, light. As a result, WSR exerts a primary control on the amount of surface reflected light measured by a remote sensor. WSR in rivers is a function of flow hydraulics, channel form, slope, bed roughness, and wind. While the relative influence of each of these components on WSR changes with scale, understanding these relationships could lead to methods for obtaining hydraulic information from image-derived metrics of WSR (i.e., surface reflectance). We collected field data on flow depth and velocity using an acoustic Doppler current profiler and simultaneously measured WSR using a custom built ultrasonic distance sensor on a diverse set of rivers ranging from a 15 m wide supraglacial river on the Greenland Ice Sheet to 100 m wide gravel-bed rivers in Wyoming and Oregon. Simultaneous multi- and hyperspectral image data sets indicate that image-derived surface reflectance is strongly correlated with WSR. Temporally distributed point measurements of flow depth, velocity, and WSR on the supraglacial river capture a threefold range in discharge (6 m3/s to 17 m3/s) and indicate that flow velocity is a primary control on WSR in smaller channels, even in the absence of sediment-induced bed roughness. Spatially distributed field measurements from large gravel-bed rivers suggests that spatial variability of WSR in the thalweg corresponds with geomorphic facies while WSR along the channel margins is more significantly influenced by grain size, relative submergence, and bank geometry. These findings suggest that controls of water surface roughness are scale dependent. Image-derived metrics of WSR provide information on channel hydraulics that could be used to define geomorphic units (i.e. pool/riffles), refine flow model inputs, and delineate aquatic habitats.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85665", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85667" } }
{"authors":"Tolu Omotoso::Purdue University--", "title":"H13G-1626: Integrated Resources Management Approach to Ensuring Sustainable Food Security in Nigeria-The Nexus of Rice Production in Niger State", "abstract":"By 2050, the world will need to feed 9 billion people. This will require a 60% increase in agricultural production and subsequently a 6% increase in water use by the agricultural sector alone. By 2030, global water demand is expected to increase by 40%, mostly in developing countries like Nigeria (Addams, Boccaletti, Kerlin, & Stuchtey, 2009) and global energy demand is expected to increase by 33% in 2035, also, mostly in emerging economies (IEA, 2013). These resources have to be managed efficiently in preparation for these future demands. Population growth leads to increased demand for water, energy and food. More food production will lead to more water-for-food and energy-for-food usage; and more demand for energy will lead to more water-for-energy needs. This nexus between water, energy and food is poorly understood and furthermore, complicated by external drivers such as climate change. Niger State Nigeria, which is blessed with abundant water and arable land resources, houses the three hydropower dams in Nigeria and one of the governments’ proposed Staple Crops Processing Zones (SCPZ) for rice production. Both of these capital intensive investments depend heavily on water resources and are all highly vulnerable to changes in climate. Thus, it is essential to know how the local climate in this state will likely change and its impacts on water, energy and food security, so that policy makers can make informed mitigation/adaptation plans; operational and investment decisions. The objective of this project is to provide information, using an integrated resources management approach, on the effects of future climate changes on water, energy (hydropower) and food resources in Niger State, Nigeria and improve knowledge on the interlinkages between water, energy and food at a local scale.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85667", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85668" } }
{"authors":"Joseph Evans::Computational Physics Inc--Michael Stevens::US Naval Research Laboratory--Jerry Lumpe::Computational Physics, Inc.--Nicholas Schneider::University of Colorado at Boulder--Ian Stewart::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--Justin Deighan::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--Sonal Jain::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--Michael Chaffin::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--Matteo Crismani::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--Arnaud Stiepen::University of Colorado at Boulder--Bill McClintock::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--Greg Holsclaw::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--Franck Lefèvre::LATMOS Laboratoire Atmosphères, Milieux, Observations Spatiales--Daniel Lo::University of Arizona--John Clarke::Boston University--Francis Epavier::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--Ed Thiemann::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--Phillip Chamberlin::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Stephen Bougher::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Jared Bell::National Institute of Aerospace--Paul Mahaffy::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Mehdi Benna::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Bruce Jakosky::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--John Correira::Computational Physics Inc--", "title":"P21A-2061: Retrieval of Mars' Upper Atmospheric Composition using Dayglow Observations by IUVS on MAVEN", "abstract":"We present direct retrievals of neutral and ion number densities in Mars’s upper atmosphere using FUV and MUV dayglow observations from 130 – 200 km. Atmospheric composition is inferred using the Atmospheric Ultraviolet Radiance Integrated Code [Strickland et al., 1999] adapted to the Martian atmosphere [Evans et al., 2015]. For our retrievals we use emission features observed by IUVS on MAVEN under daytime conditions over both northern and southern hemispheres from October 2014 to September 2015. We use retrieved CO2 densities to derive temperature variability between 150 – 220 km. We also investigate the sensitivity of neutral and ion density retrievals to variability in solar irradiance, solar longitude, and local time. We compare our retrievals to predictions from the Mars Global Ionosphere-Thermosphere Model [MGITM, Bougher et al., 2015], as well as in situ measurements by the Neutral Gas Ionizing Mass Spectrometer [NGIMS, Mahaffy et al., 2014], and quantify the differences throughout the altitude region of interest. The N2/CO2 ratio is used to show that N2 is in the diffusively separated region of the Martian atmosphere with a mean mixing ratio that is consistent with model predictions from MGITM, as well as in situ measurements by Viking 1 & 2 [Nier and McElroy, 1977] and NGIMS.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85668", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85669" } }
{"authors":"Mohamed Aly::University of Arkansas--", "title":"G41A-1008: Yellowstone Volcanic Unrest from GPS and SAR Interferometric Observations between 1992 and 2015", "abstract":"Incorporating geodetic measurements from nine Global Positioning System (GPS) stations and multi-sensor Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR), six prominent episodes of Yellowstone caldera unrest are identified between 1992 and 2015. Episode 1: 1992–1995, deflation rate of about 2.7 cm/yr, episode 2: 1996–2000, minimal deflation of 0.5 cm/yr with considerable inflation of 1.7 cm/yr at Norris, episode 3: 2000–2004, slight deflation of 0.7 cm/yr with local inflation of 0.6 cm/yr at Norris, episode 4: 2004–2009, extraordinary inflation of 3–8 cm/yr with substantial deflation of 1–4 cm/yr at Norris, episode 5: 2010–2014, notable deflation of about 1–2.4 cm/yr across the entire caldera floor, and ultimately episode 6: 2014–2015, remarkable caldera-wide inflation of about 2-6 cm/yr. During the period of observation (1992–2015), extensive deformation has occurred primarily at three locations; namely, the Mallard Lake resurgent dome, the Sour Creek resurgent dome, and the Norris Geyser Basin that is located nearby the northwestern rim of the caldera. InSAR data acquired during 1992–2015 by ERS-1, ERS-2, ENVISAT, TerraSAR-X, TanDEM-X, and Sentinel-1 are analyzed using the two-pass and the small baseline subset interferometric methods. The created interferograms do not show any alignment of crustal deformation with fault zones across the intermittently active caldera, which indicate that the magma charge and discharge, as well as the widespread hydrothermal activity are responsible for the induced deformation. Fault zones most likely have acted as pathways for the movements of magma and hydrothermal fluids, but they do not have any influence on the measured rates of surface motion. Source modeling of recent GPS and InSAR measurements indicates the existence of two distinct planar sources beneath the caldera (8–12 km) and the Norris Geyser Basin (10–16 km).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85669", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85671" } }
{"authors":"Liping Zhang::Princeton University--Thomas Delworth::GFDL--Fanrong Zeng::GFDL--", "title":"C51A-0687: The impact of multidecadal Atlantic meridional overturning circulation variations on the Southern Ocean", "abstract":"The impact of multidecadal variations of the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC) on the Southern Ocean (SO) is investigated using a coupled ocean-atmosphere model. We find that the AMOC can influence the SO via fast atmosphere teleconnections and subsequent ocean adjustments. A stronger than normal AMOC induces an anomalous warm SST over the North Atlantic, which favors an increased equator-to-pole temperature gradient in the Southern Hemisphere (SH) upper troposphere and lower stratosphere due to an amplified tropical upper tropospheric warming as a result of increased latent heat release. This eventually strengthens and pushes the Southern Hemisphere westerly jet poleward. The wind change over the SO then cools the SST by anomalous northward Ekman transports. The wind change also weakens the Antarctic bottom water (AABW) cell through changes in surface heat flux heating forcing. The poleward shifted westerly wind decreases the long term mean easterly winds over the Weddell Sea, thereby reducing the turbulent heat flux loss, decreasing surface density and therefore leading to a weakening of the AABW cell. The weakened AABW cell produces a temperature dipole in the SO, with a warm anomaly in the subsurface and a cold anomaly in the surface that corresponds to an increase of Antarctic sea ice. Opposite conditions occur for a weaker than normal AMOC. Our study here suggests that efforts to attribute the recent observed SO variability to various factors should take into consideration not only local process but also remote AMOC forcing.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85671", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85672" } }
{"authors":"Jingjing Peng::Peking University--Qiang Liu::Beijing Normal University--Jianguang Wen::RADI, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Wenjie Fan::Peking University--Baocheng Dou::Beijing Normal University--", "title":"IN43B-1725: Optimized sampling strategy of Wireless sensor network for validation of remote sensing products over heterogeneous coarse-resolution pixel", "abstract":"Coarse-resolution satellite albedo products are increasingly applied in geographical researches because of their capability to characterize the spatio-temporal patterns of land surface parameters. In the long-term validation of coarse-resolution satellite products with ground measurements, the scale effect, i.e., the mismatch between point measurement and pixel observation becomes the main challenge, particularly over heterogeneous land surfaces. Recent advances in Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) technologies offer an opportunity for validation using multi-point observations instead of single-point observation. The difficulty is to ensure the representativeness of the WSN in heterogeneous areas with limited nodes. In this study, the objective is to develop a ground-based spatial sampling strategy through consideration of the historical prior knowledge and avoidance of the information redundancy between different sensor nodes. Taking albedo as an example. First, we derive monthly local maps of albedo from 30-m HJ CCD images a 3-year period. Second, we pick out candidate points from the areas with higher temporal stability which helps to avoid the transition or boundary areas. Then, the representativeness (r) of each candidate point is evaluated through the correlational analysis between the point-specific and area-average time sequence albedo vector. The point with the highest r was noted as the new sensor point. Before electing a new point, the vector component of the selected points should be taken out from the vectors in the following correlational analysis. The selection procedure would be ceased once if the integral representativeness (R) meets the accuracy requirement. Here, the sampling method is adapted to both single-parameter and multi-parameter situations. Finally, it is shown that this sampling method has been effectively worked in the optimized layout of Huailai remote sensing station in China. The coarse resolution pixel covering this station could be well-represented by six nodes with an integral representativeness high to 99.1%. The measurements have been applied to the validation of MODIS albedo products for crop. Comparison results demonstrate that the RMSE of MODIS albedo products in growing season is 0.011, in harvest time was nearly 0.05, and for bare soil in winter is 0.009.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85672", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85674" } }
{"authors":"Emily Cardarelli::Stanford University--John Bargar::Stanford University--Kenneth Williams::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--William Dam::Department of Energy Grand Junction--Christopher Francis::Stanford University--", "title":"H31I-1554: Subsurface Nitrogen-Cycling Microbial Communities at Uranium Contaminated Sites in the Colorado River Basin", "abstract":"Throughout the Colorado River Basin (CRB), uranium (U) persists as a relic contaminant of former ore processing activities. Elevated solid-phase U levels exist in fine-grained, naturally-reduced zone (NRZ) sediments intermittently found within the subsurface floodplain alluvium of the following Department of Energy-Legacy Management sites: Rifle, CO; Naturita, CO; and Grand Junction, CO. Coupled with groundwater fluctuations that alter the subsurface redox conditions, previous evidence from Rifle, CO suggests this resupply of U may be controlled by microbially-produced nitrite and nitrate. Nitrification, the two-step process of archaeal and bacterial ammonia-oxidation followed by bacterial nitrite oxidation, generates nitrate under oxic conditions. Our hypothesis is that when elevated groundwater levels recede and the subsurface system becomes anoxic, the nitrate diffuses into the reduced interiors of the NRZ and stimulates denitrification, the stepwise anaerobic reduction of nitrate/nitrite to dinitrogen gas. Denitrification may then be coupled to the oxidation of sediment-bound U(IV) forming mobile U(VI), allowing it to resupply U into local groundwater supplies. A key step in substantiating this hypothesis is to demonstrate the presence of nitrogen-cycling organisms in U-contaminated, NRZ sediments from the upper CRB. Here we investigate how the diversity and abundances of nitrifying and denitrifying microbial populations change throughout the NRZs of the subsurface by using functional gene markers for ammonia-oxidation (amoA, encoding the α-subunit of ammonia monooxygenase) and denitrification (nirK, nirS, encoding nitrite reductase). Microbial diversity has been assessed via clone libraries, while abundances have been determined through quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR), elucidating how relative numbers of nitrifiers (amoA) and denitrifiers (nirK, nirS) vary with depth, vary with location, and relate to uranium release within NRZs in sediment cores spanning the upper CRB. Early findings from Rifle, CO indicate elevated abundances of ammonia-oxidizers seem to correlate with elevated uranium concentrations emphasizing the critical need to understand how nitrogen-cycling organisms influence subsurface U redox chemistry and mobility.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85674", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85675" } }
{"authors":"Douglas Neuhauser::Univ California Berkeley--Richard Allen::UC Berkeley Seismological Laboratory--Stephane Zuzlewski::UC Berkeley Seismological Laboratory--", "title":"S53A-2774: Northern California Earthquake Data Center: Data Sets and Data Services", "abstract":"The Northern California Earthquake Data Center (NCEDC) provides a permanent archive and real-time data distribution services for a unique and comprehensive data set of seismological and geophysical data sets encompassing northern and central California. We provide access to over 85 terabytes of continuous and event-based time series data from broadband, short-period, strong motion, and strain sensors as well as continuous and campaign GPS data at both standard and high sample rates. The Northen California Seismic System (NCSS), operated by UC Berkeley and USGS Menlo Park, has recorded over 900,000 events from 1984 to the present, and the NCEDC serves catalog, parametric information, moment tensors and first motion mechanisms, and time series data for these events. We also serve event catalogs, parametric information, and event waveforms for DOE enhanced geothermal system monitoring in northern California and Nevada. The NCEDC provides a several ways for users to access these data. The most recent development are web services, which provide interactive, command-line, or program-based workflow access to data. Web services use well-established server and client protocols and RESTful software architecture that allow users to easily submit queries and receive the requested data in real-time rather than through batch or email-based requests. Data are returned to the user in the appropriate format such as XML, RESP, simple text, or MiniSEED depending on the service and selected output format. The NCEDC supports all FDSN-defined web services as well as a number of IRIS-defined and NCEDC-defined services. We also continue to support older email-based and browser-based access to data. NCEDC data and web services can be found at http://www.ncedc.org and http://service.ncedc.org.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85675", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85676" } }
{"authors":"Michael Pritchard::University California Irvine--", "title":"ED13A-0886: Teaching climate change to four hundred freshmen GE students as a new Assistant Professor", "abstract":"I discuss some lessons learned whilst porting an established mature climate change course to an unusually large classroom at University of California, Irvine while starting up as junior faculty. I will share some thoughts on the logistics of dealing with climate change material at this scale while starting up as new faculty, things that worked well, things that didn’t, what the students thought, rapping about climate science, and what I will change next time around.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85676", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85677" } }
{"authors":"Haotian Sun::Kyushu University--Tamao Kasahara::Kyushu University--Kyoichi Otsuki::Kyushu University--", "title":"H13C-1562: Influence of stream-groundwater exchange on the spatial variations in streamflow in a steep headwater catchment", "abstract":"Understanding the spatial variations in streamflow in montane streams is important in clarifying the streamflow generation process and improving watershed model structure. However, there has been little exploration about the spatial variations in streamflow in steep headwater catchments and its relationship with stream-groundwater exchange. We investigated streamflow and stream-groundwater exchange in a 45 m reach in a small steep headwater catchment in western Japan to explore the effects of stream-groundwater exchange on the spatial variation in streamflow. The study reach had an incised channel with the substrate of cobbles and boulders, and the channel gradient was 0.5 m/m. The streamflow was gauged at both ends of the reach, and series of tracer injection experiments were conducted to quantify the water exchange between stream and groundwater. The differences between the two gauges (∆Q) was approximately 0.2 L/s (34% of downstream discharge) in low flow period in January-May and increased to 1.4 L/s (56% of downstream discharge) during high flow period in June-July. The relative flux of stream-groundwater exchange increased with streamflow, in contrast to previous findings. Thus, in the steep headwater stream studied, the spatial variation in streamflow was large, and the influence of stream-groundwater exchange on streamflow variation became larger in high flow period, suggesting the presence of additional flow paths during high flow period. The combination of spatial variations in streamflow and stream-groundwater exchange can help to clarify the unique streamflow generation process in steep headwater catchment.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85677", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85678" } }
{"authors":"Daniel Coutts::University of Calgary--William Matthews::University of Calgary--Bernard Guest::University of Calgary--Stephen Hubbard::University of Calgary--", "title":"V33D-3154: The Implications of Detrital Zircon Maximum Depositional Age (MDA) from Large Sample Datasets (n>500)", "abstract":"The youngest sub-population of a detrital zircon geochronological dataset is routinely used to approximate the age of deposition for a sample. The ages represent a maximum depositional age (MDA) because the detrital zircons analyzed crystallized at depth, in a magma chamber prior to being exposed at the surface through erosion or volcanic eruption. Dickinson and Gehrels (2009) demonstrate four methods of calculating the MDA of a zircon population using U-Pb ages, which are assessed in this study. Previous MDA studies used relatively small datasets (n<100), reducing the likelihood of finding the youngest population in a sample. We consider large-n datasets (n>500), which have a greater likelihood of capturing a significant proportion of the youngest population and therefore have the potential to improve the accuracy of a calculated MDA. We assess the effects of sample size and MDA calculation methods using a numerical model consisting of a simulated population of detrital zircon grains with known ages. Using our population of 25048 simulated grains, we ran repeated trials of varying sample sizes (n=50, 100, 300, 500, 700, 1000, 1500) to compare the output of MDA calculation techniques. As sample size increases the youngest sub-population of zircons is better defined, and the MDA decreases and becomes more precise. As a further test, model results are compared to U-Pb data (n=695) from a sample of the Maasrichtian-Paleocene Gabriola Formation (Nanaimo Group, B.C., Canada). Similar trials of varying sample sizes show the same decrease in MDA. Biostratigraphic analysis assigned the formation to the Maastrichtian (72.1 – 66.0 Ma), however, our results indicate that deposition took place in the Danian (66.0 – 61.6 Ma). This result has implications for the timing of forearc basin fill, and more broadly, the evolution of the Western North American Cordillera. MDA methods on large-n datasets can be used to hone stratigraphic correlations and calculate sediment accumulation rates.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85678", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85679" } }
{"authors":"Caroline Ridley::Environmental Protection Agency Washington DC--Susan Burden::Environmental Protection Agency Washington DC--Megan Fleming::Environmental Protection Agency Washington DC--Christopher Knightes::Organization Not Listed--Jonathan Koplos::Cadmus Group, Inc.--Stephen LeDuc::Environmental Protection Agency Arlington--Shari Ring::Cadmus Group, Inc.--John Stanek::Environmental Protection Agency Research Triangle Park--Mary Ellen Tuccillo::Cadmus Group, Inc.--Jim Weaver::Environmental Protection Agency Ada--Jeffrey Frithsen::Environmental Protection Agency Washington DC--", "title":"H34C-01: A National Assessment of the Potential Impacts of Hydraulic Fracturing Activities on Drinking Water Resources", "abstract":"The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency recently released a draft assessment of the potential impacts of hydraulic fracturing on drinking water resources. As part of the draft assessment, we reviewed, analyzed, and synthesized information from over 950 sources and concluded that there are above and below ground mechanisms by which hydraulic fracturing activities have the potential to impact drinking water resources. These mechanisms include: Water withdrawals in times of, or in areas with, low water availability; Spills of hydraulic fracturing fluids and produced water;  Fracturing directly into underground drinking water resources;  Below ground migration of liquids and gases; and  Inadequate treatment and discharge of wastewater. Of the potential mechanisms identified in this report, we found specific instances where one or more mechanisms led to impacts on drinking water resources, including contamination of drinking water wells. The number of identified cases, however, was small compared to the number of hydraulically fractured wells. This finding could reflect a rarity of effects on drinking water resources, but may also be due to other limiting factors. These factors include: insufficient pre- and post-fracturing data on the quality of drinking water resources; the paucity of long-term systematic studies; the presence of other sources of contamination precluding a definitive link between hydraulic fracturing activities and an impact; and the inaccessibility of some information on hydraulic fracturing activities and potential impacts. Disclaimer: The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views or polices of the EPA.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85679", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85680" } }
{"authors":"Masatake Hori::Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC)--", "title":"C53A-0768: Changes in Seasonal and Extreme Arctic Cyclone Events in the CMIP5 Climate Models", "abstract":"Cyclone activities are governed by many boundary conditions, such as the underlying SST or sea ice, the relative heating between the continent and the ocean, and their relative location against the jet stream to name a few. All these factors and their seasonal march is prone to change under the future global warming condition. Especially in the Arctic, the timing of sea ice melting and freezing, seasonal change in snow cover, and the location of upper level jets all contribute towards a change in cyclone seasonal distribution and extreme events. Here, we use a Langrangean method of detecting cyclones and their activity under the historical and rcp 4.5 scenario of 8 CMIP5 climate models to assess the change in Arctic cyclone activities. We find that while the models show weaker cyclone activities than observation and inter-model difference is large in some cases, they simulate the seasonal cycle and extreme events reasonably well. In the winter season under the global warming scenario, many models exhibits a northeastward shift in mid-latitude storm track resulting in mode cyclones entering the Arctic from the mid-latitudes. There is also a marked increase in the number of cyclones in the Barents/Kara Sea where correlation with sea ice is suspected. During the summer season, a large change in the Arctic cyclone activity located near the North Pole is evident in many models. This change in Arctic cyclone is due to contribution of more cyclogenesis within the Arctic circle. In this presentation, we also look at other seasons and the seasonal march of the cyclone activity within the Arctic and its interaction with the mid-latitudes. We also document the change in extreme events under the climate models.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85680", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85681" } }
{"authors":"Hiroyuki Honda::Kyushu University--Yasuhiro Mitani::Kyushu University--Keigo Kitamura::Kyushu University--Hiro Ikemi::Kyushu University--Shinnosuke Takaki::Kyushu University--", "title":"H51L-1560: Experimental study of two-phase fluid flow in two different porosity types of sandstone by P-wave velocity and electrical Impedance measurement", "abstract":"Carbon dioxide (CO2) capture and storage (CCS) is recently expected as the promising method to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. It is important to investigate CO2 behavior in the reservoir, to evaluate the safety and to account the stored CO2 volume. In this study, experimental investigation is conducted to discuss the relationships between injected fluid speed (Flow rate: FR) or capillary number (Ca) and non-wetting fluid flow by compressional wave velocity (Vp) and electrical impedance (Z). In the experiment, N2 and supercritical CO2 were injected into the two sandstones with different porosity (φ), Berea sandstone (φ: 18 %), and Ainoura sandstone (φ: 11.9 %). The dimension of the rock specimens is cored cylinder with a 35 mm diameter and 70 mm height. Experimental conditions are nearly same as the reservoir of deep underground (Confining pressure:15MPa, 40℃). Initial conditions of the specimen are brine (0.1wt%-KCl) saturated. Four piezo-electrical transducers (PZTs) are set on the each surface of the top, middle, lower of the specimen to monitor the CO2 bahavior by Vp. To measuring Z, we use for electrodes method with Ag-AgCl electrodes. Four electrodes are wounded around specimen on the both sides of PZTs. We measured the changes of these parameters with injecting N2, injected fluid speed (FR), the differential pore pressure (DP), N2 saturation (SN2), P-wave velocity (Vp) and electrical impedance (Z), respectively. We also estimated the Ca from measured FR. From these experimental results, there are no obvious Vp changes with increasing Ca, while Z measurement indicates clear and continuous increment. In regards to Vp, Vp reduced at the small FR (0.1 to 0.2 ml/min). As the Ca increases, Vp doesn’t indicate large reduction. On the other hand, Z is more sensitive to change the fluid saturation than Vp. It is well-known that both of Vp and Z are the function of fluid saturation. Though, these experimental results are not consistent with previous studies. In this study, we will discuss this mismatch by using fluid mechanical theory and numerical simulation of two-phase fluid flow in porous geological medium based on experimental results of two different types of sandstone.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85681", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85682" } }
{"authors":"Churngwei Chu::Science Systems and Applications, Inc. Hampton--Sunny Sun-Mack::Science Systems and Applications, Inc. Hampton--Elizabeth Heckert::Science Systems and Applications, Inc. Hampton--Yan Chen::Science Systems and Applications, Inc. Hampton--David Doelling::NASA Langley Research Center--", "title":"IN53A-1818: CERESVis: A QC Tool for CERES that Leverages Browser Technology for Data Validation", "abstract":"In this poster, we are going to present three user interfaces that CERES team uses to validate pixel-level data. Besides our home grown tools, we will aslo present the browser technology that we use to provide interactive interfaces, such as jquery, HighCharts and Google Earth. We pass data to the users' browsers and use the browsers to do some simple computations. The three user interfaces are: Thumbnails -- it displays hundrends images to allow users to browse 24-hour data files in few seconds. Multiple-synchronized cursors -- it allows users to compare multiple images side by side. Bounding Boxes and Histograms -- it allows users to draw multiple bounding boxes on an image and the browser computes/display the histograms.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85682", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85683" } }
{"authors":"Steven Marsh::University of the Fraser Valley--Sharon Gillies::University of the Fraser Valley--Bernhard Peucker-Ehrenbrink::WHOI--Alida Janmaat::University of the Fraser Valley--Ellen Clemence::University of the Fraser Valley--Audrey Faber::University of the Fraser Valley--Ashleigh Yakemchuk::University of the Fraser Valley--Marlena McCabe::University of the Fraser Valley--Alexandra Toner::University of the Fraser Valley--Alanna Strangway::University of the Fraser Valley--Shae Turner::University of the Fraser Valley--Davinder Sidhu::University of the Fraser Valley--Baljot Sidhu::University of the Fraser Valley--Jasmine Sekhton::University of the Fraser Valley--Karanjit Puri::University of the Fraser Valley--Dianne Paulson::University of the Fraser Valley--Gaganjeet Mahil::University of the Fraser Valley--Ryan Leffers::University of the Fraser Valley--Shyna Kanda::University of the Fraser Valley--Michael Gaultier::University of the Fraser Valley--Harleen Dhaliwal::University of the Fraser Valley--", "title":"H13L-1765: Variation in water chemistry parameters in the Clayburn Creek watershed, British Columbia during fall 2015.", "abstract":"faculty and students from the University of the Fraser Valley have conducted the time series sampling of water chemistry of the Fraser River at Fort Langley and five Fraser Valley tributaries as a member of the Global Rivers Observatory (GRO, www.globalrivers.org) organized by Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and Woods Hole Research Center. Clayburn Creek and Willband Creek in Abbotsford, British Columbiahave been part of this project and have been sampled for nutrient and major ion concentrations and parameters such as water temperature, dissolved oxygen, conductivity, pH and turbidity. This watershed is being threatened by increasing anthropogenic activity (agricultural, industrial and residential development) that may threaten the salmon that spawn in this watershed. Documenting the change in the water chemistry in this watershed as the seasons progress from a dry summer to a wet fall will yield a greater understanding of our impact on this watershed and may assist our attempts to protect this watershed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85683", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85686" } }
{"authors":"Hailing Yu::IGSNRR Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research, CAS--", "title":"GC13B-1152: Plant leaf and root N, P levels and their relationship to geographical and climate factors in a Chinese grassland transect", "abstract":"Nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) are generally considered the two most limiting and essential elements for the function of plants and ecosystems. Ecological stoichiometry of plant N and P provides the dominant means for investigating plant nutrient, and it may provide insights for fields as diverse as global carbon modeling, global climate change, and macroecology. Here we measured N and P contents and their ratios for 132 leaf samples and 120 root samples collected at 132 sites along the 5000km long China Grassland Transect (CGT) that traverses the Inner Mongolian and Qinghai-Tibet Plateaus. The aim was to explore the patterns of leaf N, P and root N, P and their ratio (N/P) respectively in relation to variability in geography, temperature and precipitation, and also the patterns of the relative N and P contents in leaf and root (leaf N(P)/ root N(P)). Results show that: 1) with decreasing longitude and latitude, increasing altitude and mean annual precipitation, leaf N and P increased, N/P decreased. 2) root N increased with increasing longitude, latitude, mean annual temperature, root P only increased with longitude. The patterns of root N,P were not in accord with the patterns of leaf N, P. 3) leaf and root relative N and P increased with increasing latitude and decreasing altitude, and relative N content also increased with decreasing mean annual temperature and increasing mean annual precipitation. Leaf and root relative N and P content reflected the distribution characteristics of the elements in relation to variability in geographical and climate factors. When there was more precipitation, or lower temperature, more N would be distributed to root. Lastly, we speculated that the ratio of leaf and root relative N and relative P content should be a fixed value, and our study was 0.81±0.51.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85686", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85687" } }
{"authors":"Christina Shintani::University of Oregon--", "title":"EP43B-0976: Comparing Remote Sensing Techniques in Detecting Salmonid Habitat, Salmon River, Oregon", "abstract":"Many restoration projects in the Pacific Northwest are implemented to improve habitat quality, quantity, and complexity for fish. Although numerous engineered log structures have been constructed in the hopes of achieving these goals, relatively few projects have been rigorously monitored to determine their success. This research seeks to compare the utility and application between photogrammetric and spectral depth approaches in detecting fish habitat in order to determine which method is more accurate and affordable for monitoring channel bathymetry. While each of these techniques has been individually studied, previous research has not directly compared and quantified their differences. Channel bathymetry data were collected by combining pre- and post-restoration digital photographs of the Salmon River in Northeast Clackamas County, Oregon, using structure-from-motion (SfM). The resulting 3D point cloud will be used to estimate water depths using photogrammetry and spectral depth. The photogrammetric method applies a refraction correction to the extracted water depth from the SfM topography to derive water depth. A regression between the surveyed water depth values and digital number values of surface pixels will derive depth. The resulting water depths from these two methods will be compared to the surveyed water depths for their accuracy and precision, particularly in critical salmonid habitats. The quantification of these differences will be an important contribution to river restoration science as it will allow for more accurate measurement and monitoring of changes in fish habitat. In the future, these data will be used in an eco-hydraulic River2D model to simulate changes in salmonid habitat availability after restoration.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85687", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85688" } }
{"authors":"Krista Soderlund::University of Texas, Institute for Geophysics--Andrey Sheyko::ETH Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich--Eric King::U.S. Global Development Lab--Jonathan Aurnou::University of California Los Angeles--", "title":"P41A-2041: Parameterization of the Lorentz to Coriolis Force Ratio in Planetary Dynamos", "abstract":"The Lorentz to Coriolis force ratio is an important parameter for the dynamics of planetary cores: it is expected that dynamos with dominant Coriolis forces will be driven by fundamentally different archetypes of fluid motions than those with co-dominant Lorentz forces. Using a suite of geodynamo simulations, we have tested several parameterizations of the Lorentz to Coriolis force ratio against direct calculations and developed a scaling estimate to predict this ratio for planetary cores. Our results suggest that the Earth's core is likely to be in magnetostrophic balance where the Lorentz and Coriolis forces are comparable. The Lorentz force may also be significant in Jupiter's core, where it is predicted to be approximately a factor of ten less than the Coriolis force. Magnetic fields become increasingly sub-dominant for the other planets: the Coriolis force is predicted to exceed the Lorentz force by at least two orders of magnitude within the cores of Saturn, Uranus/Neptune, Ganymede, and Mercury.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85688", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85689" } }
{"authors":"Chadi Sayde::Oregon State University--Daniel Moreno::Oregon State University--Javier Benitez-buelga::Technical University of Madrid--Jianzhi Dong::Delft University of Technology--Tyson Ochsner::Oklahoma State University Main Campus--Susan Steele-Dunne::Delft University of Technology--Leonor Rodriguez-Sinobas::Technical University of Madrid--John Selker::Oregon State University--", "title":"H23B-1582: Actively Heated Fiber Optics for Distributed Soil Moisture Measurements: Addressing Field Calibration and Spatial Variability", "abstract":"The Actively Heated Fiber Optics (AHFO) method has the potential to measure soil water content at high temporal (<1hr) and spatial (every 0.25 m) resolutions along buried fiber optics (FO) cables multiple kilometers in length. This game-changing method can capture soil water dynamics over four orders of magnitude in spatial scale (0.1-1000 m). However, many challenges remain to resolve for the practical applicability of the AHFO at the field scale. In particular, cost effective distributed calibration method that accounts for the spatial variability of the soil thermal properties is still lacking. In fact, AHFO infers soil water content from observing the thermal response of the soil to a heat pulse injected along the fiber optic cable. For a particular location, the temporal variation of the soil thermal response depends mainly on the soil moisture content. Across the field the variability of thermal response will also be a function of the soil thermal properties which change with the soil mineralogy and bulk density. Here we present various strategies for distributed calibration of the AHFO method based on numerical simulation, direct field observation, and/or laboratory experimentation. In particular we will present a novel approach for mapping the soil thermal behavior by conducting AHFO measurements at strategic soil water conditions such as near saturation and dry conditions. We will show results from a large scale deployment at the MOISST site in Stillwater, Oklahoma where 4900 m of fiber optic soil moisture sensing cables are providing daily soil moisture measurements at >39,000 locations in the field. The material is based upon work supported by NASA under award NNX12AP58G, with equipment and assistance also provided by CTEMPs.org with support from the National Science Foundation under Grant Number 1129003. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of NASA or the National Science Foundation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85689", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85690" } }
{"authors":"Gianluca Blois::University of Notre Dame--Jim Best::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Kenneth Christensen::University of Notre Dame--Andrew Kennedy::University of Notre Dame--Aaron Donahue::University of Notre Dame--Naira Hovakimyan::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Venanzio Cichella::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Ishaan Pakrasi::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--", "title":"NH52A-04: Combining UAV and high-resolution image-based particle image velocimetry to monitor flow in lakes and rivers", "abstract":"Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) are increasingly being applied by the geophysical community for large-scale surveys of environments that are challenging to reach (e.g. volcanoes, glaciers). Some of these natural systems include large bodies of water such as oceans, lakes and rivers. These environments are highly dynamic and, even in normal conditions, their characterization requires long surveys involving the deployment of expensive equipment and large crews. Technical challenges, and thus costs, become prohibitive especially during extreme natural events that may pose a threat not only to the monitoring facilities but, more importantly, to the surrounding residential areas (e.g. river flooding, extreme waves). Traditional measurement techniques have difficulty or are unable to monitor some flow quantities (i.e. flow discharge and wave energy content) associated with these natural systems, especially during emergencies. Extreme hydrodynamic loads due to high flow discharges and/or highly energetic waves may tamper with traditional monitoring systems that are typically submerged or fixed in the vicinity of the water body. Here, we propose to employ specially developed UAV systems to remotely and safely gain high-resolution images of the water surface. Such images are processed using robust large-scale particle image velocimetry (LSPIV) algorithms that are able to accurately resolve the complex two-dimensional flow field of the water surface over extensive areas. These systems can theoretically be deployed in a cost-effective way for long periods of time for continuous monitoring. Such monitoring is key to inform and calibrate predictive tools that can reconstruct potential emergency scenarios. In addition, during extreme natural events, data can be collected with no risk to human operators. Here, we discuss the concept and technology employed to render these measurement systems effective, and provide examples of applications that show the depth of the data that can be extracted from aerial images and thus the potential of this technology.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85690", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85691" } }
{"authors":"JIA-Fong Fan::Howard University--Hann-Ming Juang::National Centers For Environmental Prediction-Environmental Modeling Center--", "title":"A23E-0382: A Study of The Impact of Full-component Coriolis Force on Regional Climate Modeling Over Tropical Areas", "abstract":"In most numerical weather prediction models, the cosine terms of the Coriolis force are omitted due to the use of shallow-atmosphere approximation with the angular momentum principle. However, by applying the non-hydrostatic deep momentum system, we can omit the angular momentum principle for regional modeling, while leaving the cosine terms, to calculate the full-component Coriolis force. From the governing equations, we can see that the cosine terms of the Coriolis force affect zonal wind (u) and vertical wind (w). The magnitude of the Coriolis force is determined by two factors: wind speed and latitude. The maximum of the cosine function happens when the latitude is zero degrees, which is at the equator. In this study, we conduct research into the effects of full-component Coriolis force in the nonhydrostatic regional spectral model (RSM) over tropical areas. Numerical experiments will be done to show the impact of the cosine terms of Coriolis force on wind field and precipitation structure. The differences in the two approaches will be compared in order to prove their relative effectiveness in climate prediction.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85691", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85692" } }
{"authors":"Do-Hyung Kim::University of Maryland College Park--", "title":"B53E-0618: Effectiveness of Protected Areas in the Pan-Tropics and International Aid for Conservation", "abstract":"Protected areas are crucial for tropical forest conservation efforts. Estimation of the effectiveness of protected areas is thus important for evaluating the efficacy of forest conservation policies and priorities. However, comprehensive evaluation of the long-term effects of Protected Areas and international aid is lacking. However, with the recent availability of long-term, large-scale forest cover change data at 30-m resolution, it has become possible to address some of the issues surrounding the effectiveness of protected areas. To evaluate the effectiveness of Protected Areas in the pan-tropics and international aid for conservation, we use the 30m resolution data along with econometrics 1) to estimate avoided deforestation by PAs in the tropics during the 2000s, 2) estimate effects of international aid on avoided deforestation by PAs and 3) analyze the relationships between the socio-economic variables and increases in deforestation, avoided deforestation by PAs and effects of international aid. Our results show that protected areas avoided 83,500 ± 21,200 km2 of deforestation during the 2000s. Brazil showed the highest estimates of effects of international aid on the avoided deforestation of 22 m2/USD, which is about 50 times higher compared to Indonesia (0.5 m2/USD). The regression analysis between avoided deforestation, effects of international aid and socio-economic factors demonstrates that PAs have been relatively more effective in the countries where the deforestation pressures were increasing and that governance and forest change monitoring capacity may be important factors enhancing the efficacy of international aid. Our study presents the first pan-tropical analysis of the long-term evaluation of the effectiveness of protected areas, international aid and their regulating factors using spatially explicit fine resolution data. Our findings allow us to pinpoint where conservation initiatives and resource management are effectively practiced and to discover the link with socio-economic factors and their significance and underlying implications for the effectiveness of PAs.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85692", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85693" } }
{"authors":"Ben Southworth::University of Colorado at Boulder--Sascha Kempf::University of Colorado at Boulder--Juergen Schmidt::University of Oulu--", "title":"P11C-2113: Modeling Europa's Dust Plumes", "abstract":"The discovery of Europa maintaining a probably sporadic water vapor plume constitutes a huge scientific opportunity for NASA’s upcoming mission to this Galilean moon. Measuring the properties of material emerging from interior sources offers a unique chance to understand conditions at Europa’s subsurface ocean. Exploiting results obtained for the Enceladus plume, we adjust the ejection model by Schmidt et al. [2008] to the conditions at Europa. In this way, we estimate properties of a possible, yet unobserved dust component of the Europa plume. For a size-dependent speed distribution of emerging ice particles we use the model from Kempf et al. [2010] for grain dynamics, modified to run simulations of plumes on Europa. Specifically, we model emission from the two plume locations determined from observations by Roth et al. [2014] and also from other locations chosen at the closest approach of low-altitude flybys investigated in the Europa Clipper study. This allows us to estimate expected fluxes of ice grains on the spacecraft. We then explore the parameter space of Europa dust plumes with regard to particle speed distribution parameters, plume location, and spacecraft flyby elevation. Each parameter set results in a 3-dimensional particle density structure through which we simulate flybys, and a map of particle fallback (‘snowfall’) on the surface of Europa. Due to the moon’s high escape speed, a Europa plume will eject few to no particles that can escape its gravity, which has several further consequences: (i) For given ejection velocity a Europa plume will have a smaller scale height, with a higher particle number densities than the plume on Enceladus, (ii) plume particles will not feed the diffuse Galilean dust ring, (iii) the snowfall pattern on the surface will be more localized about the plume location, and will not induce a global m = 2 pattern as seen on Enceladus, and (iv) safely observing an active plume will require low altitude flybys, preferably at 50-100 km. Our simulations provide an extensive library documenting the possible structure of Europa dust plumes, which can be quickly refined as more data on Europa dust plumes are collected. The attached image shows example number density profiles for two particle size distributions of slope α ejected from a Roth et al. plume, with the Clipper E35 flyby overlaid.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85693", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85694" } }
{"authors":"Richard Lawford::Morgan State University--Sushel Unninayar::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Dominique Berod::GEO Secretariat--", "title":"H43E-1555: Water Cycle Extremes: from Observations to Decisions", "abstract":"Extremes in the water cycle (droughts and floods) pose major challenges for water resource managers and emergency services. These challenges arise from observational and prediction systems, advisory services, impact reduction strategies, and cleanup and recovery operations. The Group on Earth Observations (GEO) through its Water Strategy (“GEOSS Water Strategy: from observations to decisions”) is seeking to provide systems that will enable its members to more effectively meet their information needs prior to and during an extreme event. This presentation reviews the wide range of impacts that arise from extremes in the water cycle and the types of data and information needed to plan for and respond to these extreme events. It identifies the capabilities and limitations of current observational and analysis systems in defining the scale, timing, intensity and impacts of water cycle extremes and in directing society’s response to them. This summary represents an early preliminary assessment of the global and regional information needs of water resource managers and begins to outline a strategy within GEO for using Earth Observations and ancillary information to address these needs.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85694", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85695" } }
{"authors":"Tae Kim::University of Alabama in Huntsville--Nikolai Pogorelov::University of Alabama in Huntsville--Charles Arge::Air Force Research Laboratory Kirtland AFB--Bernard Jackson::University of California San Diego--Igor Kryukov::University of Alabama in Huntsville--P K Manoharan::National Centre for Radio Astrophysics--Preethi Manoharan::University of Alabama in Huntsville--Derek Tropf::Organization Not Listed--Hsiu-Shan Yu::University of California San Diego--Gary Zank::University of Alabama in Huntsville--", "title":"SH31C-2441: Using In Situ and Remote Sensing Data to Model the Plasma Flow throughout the Heliosphere", "abstract":"The solar wind is a turbulent medium with physical properties fluctuating on multiple scales. We model three-dimensional solar wind plasma flow using our own software, Multi-Scale Fluid-Kinetic Simulation Suite, which, in addition to the thermal solar wind plasma, takes into account charge exchange of solar wind protons with interstellar neutral atoms and treats nonthermal ions (pickup ions, PUIs) born during this process as a separate fluid. Additionally, our model includes a description of turbulence generated by PUIs. For this investigation, we run our model using plasma and turbulence parameters from OMNI data as time-dependent boundary conditions at 1 AU for the Reynolds-averaged MHD equations and investigate the evolution of plasma and turbulent fluctuations along the trajectory of the New Horizons spacecraft, which recently passed by Pluto nearly ten years after launch. We also present solar wind simulations starting at 0.1 AU outwards using interplanetary scintillation data as boundary conditions. Simulations are compared with OMNI and STEREO data. The purpose of this study is to create a time-dependent solar wind model capable of reproducing the plasma flow, magnetic field, and turbulence along the trajectories of Solar Probe Plus and Solar Orbiter.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85695", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85697" } }
{"authors":"Aleya Kaushik::Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences--Max Berkelhammer::University of Illinois at Chicago--Michael O'Neill::Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences--David Noone::Dept Atmospheric & Oceanic Sci--", "title":"PP14A-06: Refining Isotopic Parameterization Choices Using Stable Water Isotope Profiles In Surface Layer And Soil To Improve Modeling Of Mid-Latitude Continental Moisture Cycling", "abstract":"The moisture balance of the continental boundary layer plays an important role in regulating the exchange of water and energy between the land surface and atmosphere. The surface layer moisture balance is controlled by a number of factors including precipitation, infiltration, evaporation and transpiration. Measurements of stable isotope ratios in water can be exploited to better understand the mechanisms controlling atmosphere-land surface water fluxes. We present three years of in situ tower-based measurements of stable isotope ratios of water (δD and δ18O) in vapor, precipitation, vegetation and soil from the Boulder Atmospheric Observatory, a semi-arid 300 meter tall-tower site in Erie, Colorado. Co-located meteorological and disdrometer measurements at the surface and 300m allow us to explore key aspects of continental moisture cycling in a semi-arid environment such as the important contribution of sub-surface vapor diffusion to the surface water vapor budget and its implications for partitioning in dry ecosystems, and the role of rain evaporation during precipitation events on inter-event and seasonal time scales. We use our observations to constrain a Craig-Gordon evaporation model at the land surface to weight the contributions of rainfall, surface water vapor exchange and sub-surface vapor diffusion to soil water isotope values. A multi-season in situ time series of surface vapor isotope profiles in conjunction with soil and precipitation allows us to field-validate choices for parameters such as the kinetic fractionation factor for each process. This has implications both for modeling short-term gas exchange at the land surface in modern-day climate models as well as for refining paleoclimate interpretations of stable oxygen and hydrogen isotope-based proxies. Tall-tower precipitation and vapor isotope profile data can also be analyzed in conjunction with disdrometer data on inter-event and seasonal time scales to quantify the role of rain evaporation in the surface layer water balance. These studies can help refine fractionation factor choices in land surface and boundary layer parameterizations in isotope-enable climate models.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85697", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85698" } }
{"authors":"Hyun A Lee::KBSI Korea Basic Science Institute--Junseok Lee::KBSI Korea Basic Science Institute--Eunhye Kwon::KBSI Korea Basic Science Institute Catholic University of Korea--Doyoung Kim::KBSI Korea Basic Science Institute--Hye-On Yoon::KBSI Korea Basic Science Institute--", "title":"H13A-1495: Determination of fluorine concentrations using wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence (WDXRF) spectrometry to analyze fluoride precipitates.", "abstract":"In recent times, fluorine has been receiving increasing attention due to the possibility for chemical (HF) leakage accidents and its high toxicity to human and environment. In this respect, a novel approach for the determination of fluorine concentrations in water samples using wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence (WDXRF) spectrometry was investigated in this study. The main disadvantage of WDXRF technique for fluorine analysis is low analytical sensitivity for light elements with atomic number (Z) less than 15. To overcome this problem, we employed the precipitation reaction which fluoride is reacted with cation such as Al3+ and/or Ca2+ prior to WDXRF analysis because of their high analytical sensitivity. The cation was added in fluoride solutions to form precipitate (AlF3 and/or CaF2) and then the solution was filtered through Whatman filter. After drying at 60 °C for 5 min, the filter was coated with X-ray film and directly analyzed using WDXRF spectrometry. Consequently, we analyzed the cation on filter and subsequently fluorine concentration was calculated inversely based on chemical form of precipitate. This method can improve the analytical sensitivity of WDXRF technique for fluorine analysis and be applicable to various elements that can make precipitate.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85698", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85699" } }
{"authors":"Judy Wall::University of Missouri Columbia--Romain Bridou::University of Missouri Columbia--Steven Smith::University of Missouri Columbia--Kenny Mok::University of California Berkeley--Florian Widner::University of California Berkeley--Alexander Johs::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Jerry Parks::Oak Ridge National Lab--Eric Pierce::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Dwayne Elias::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Cynthia Gilmour::Smithsonian Institution--Michi Taga::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"B14C-06: Metabolic Interfaces of Mercury Methylation Proteins in Desulfovibrio sp. ND132", "abstract":"Two genes necessary for microbial production of the neurotoxin methylmercury have been identified; hgcA encoding a corrinoid methyltransferase and hgcB, a ferredoxin-like protein. To date, all microbes possessing orthologs of these genes that have been tested are capable of methylating mercury; whereas, organisms lacking hgcA and hgcB are not. Also of interest is the observation that confirmed mercury-methylating microbes are all considered anaerobes although not members of a specific phylogenetic group. They are found scattered in the genomes of methanogens, Firmicutes, and Deltaproteobacteria. Methylation has not been demonstrated to provide protection of the microbes to mercury exposure. To determine the source of evolutionary pressure for acquisition and maintenance of these genes, we are seeking to understand whether there is a second function of the proteins. We are seeking evidence for the metabolic source(s) of the methyl group and for competing reactions. We have found that deletion of the metH gene encoding a tetrahydrofolate methyltransferase in Desulfovibrio sp. ND132 decreases the mercury methylation capacity by ca. 95%, consistent with an interpretation that this enzyme is involved in the pathway for the methyl group for HgcA. In addition, the corrinoid present in HgcA and the MetH of ND132 is strictly dependent on nicotinate nucleotide:5,6-dimethylbenzimidazole phosphoribosyltransferase encoded by the cobT gene, linking methionine biosynthesis with mercury methylation at a second level. Additional methyl transferases have not been found to be necessary for this function. While earlier evidence was provided for an involvement of the CO dehydrogenase/acetylCoA synthase, this enzyme is not universally present in methylating strains unlike the pathway for methionine synthesis.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85699", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85700" } }
{"authors":"Meredith Jabis::University of California Berkeley--Daniel Winkler::University of California Irvine--Lara Kueppers::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--", "title":"B21G-0562: Warming Contracts Flowering Phenology in an Alpine Ecosystem", "abstract":"In alpine ecosystems where temperature increases associated with anthropogenic climate change are likely to be amplified, the flowering phenology of plants may be particularly sensitive to changes in environmental signals. For example, earlier snowmelt and higher temperature have been found to be important factors driving plant emergence and onset of flowering. However, few studies have examined the interactive role of soil moisture in response to warming. Using infrared heating to actively warm plots crossed with manual watering over the growing season in a moist alpine meadow at Niwot Ridge, Colorado, our preliminary results indicate that community-level phenology (length of flowering time across all species) was contracted with heating but was unaffected by watering. At the species level, additional water extended the length of the flowering season by one week for almost half (43%) of species. Heating, which raised plant and surface soil temperatures (+1.5 C) advanced snowmelt by ~7.6 days days and reduced soil moisture by ~2%, advanced flowering phenology for 86% of species. The response of flowering phenology to combined heating and watering was predominantly a heating effect. However, watering did appear to mitigate advances in end of flowering for 22% of species. The length of flowering season, for some species, appears to be tied, in part, to moisture availability as alleviating ambient soil moisture stress delayed phenology in unheated plots. Therefore, we conclude that both temperature and moisture appear to be important factors driving flowering phenology in this alpine ecosystem. The relationship between flowering phenology and species- or community-level productivity is not well established, but heating advanced community peak productivity by 5.4 days, and also reduced peak productivity unless additional water was provided, indicating some consistency between drivers of productivity and drivers of flowering phenology.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85700", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85701" } }
{"authors":"Junsik Kim::Seoul National University--Dong Kun Lee::Seoul National University--Wookju Jeong::Seoul National University--Sunyong Sung::Seoul National University--Jonghoon Park::Seoul National University--", "title":"B33E-0763: The Urban Heat Island Impact in Consideration of Spatial Pattern of Urban Landscape and Structure", "abstract":"Preceding study has established a clear relationship between land surface temperature and area of land covers. However, only few studies have specifically examined the effects of spatial patterns of land covers and urban structure. To examine how much the local climate is affected by the spatial pattern in highly urbanized city, we investigated the correlation between land surface temperature and spatial patterns of land covers. In the analysis of correlation, we categorized urban structure to four different land uses: Apartment residential area, low rise residential area, industrial area and central business district. Through this study, we aims to examine the types of residential structure and land cover pattern for reducing urban heat island and sustainable development. Based on land surface temperature, we investigated the phenomenon of urban heat island through using the data of remote sensing. This study focused on Daegu in Korea. This city, one of the hottest city in Korea has basin form. We used high-resolution land cover data and land surface temperature by using Landsat8 satellite image to examine 100 randomly selected sample sites of 884.15km2  (1)In each land use, we quantified several landscape-levels and class-level landscape metrics for the sample study sites. (2)In addition, we measured the land surface temperature in 3 year hot summer seasons (July to September). Then, we investigated the pattern of land surface temperature for each land use through Ecognition package. (3)We deducted the Pearson correlation coefficients between land surface temperature and each landscape metrics. (4)We analyzed the variance among the four land uses. (5)Using linear regression, we determined land surface temperature model for each land use. (6)Through this analysis, we aims to examine the best pattern of land cover and artificial structure for reducing urban heat island effect in highly urbanized city. The results of linear regression showed that proportional land cover of grass, tree, water and impervious surfaces well explained the temperature in apartment residential areas. In contrast, the changes in the pattern of water, grass, tree and impervious surfaces were the best to determine the temperature in low rise residential area, central business district and industrial area.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85701", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85702" } }
{"authors":"Russell Qualls::University of Idaho--Ayodeji Arogundade::Lewis and Clark State College--", "title":"C33C-0833: Combination of MODIS Snow, Cloud and Land Spatial Coverage Data with SNOTEL to Generate Inter-Annual and Within-Season Snow Depletion Curves and Maps", "abstract":"Quantification of spatial coverage of snow and its temporal decline throughout the snowmelt season is an important input for snowmelt runoff models in the prediction of runoff and simulation of streamflow. Several remote sensing methods of snow cover mapping exist today with differing spatial and temporal resolutions that can be used in determining the progressive reduction of snow cover during snowmelt. The Moderate-Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) satellite sensor has provided global coverage with daily temporal resolution and a spatial resolution on the order of 1 km2 since the year 2000. Several challenges hinder the development and routine use of MODIS snow covered area products, which include cloud and forest obscuration of snow-covered surfaces. Furthermore, the relatively recent launch of the MODIS sensor prevents its direct use in historical or future (e.g., climate change scenario) studies. Based on numerous observations in the literature that snowmelt occurs in a repeating spatial pattern, albeit shifted and/or accelerated or decelerated in time, from one year to the next, a method is presented that makes use of remotely sensed MODIS snow, land and cloud data and concurrent ground-based Snow Telemetry (SNOTEL) data to construct a single, inter-annually applicable and temporally dimensionless snow depletion curve and a corresponding snow depletion map. MODIS Cloud data and ground-based SNOTEL snowfall data during the snowmelt season are used together with the inter-annual snowmelt curve/map to generate within-year snowmelt curves that account for the impact of additional melt-season snowfall. The method is successfully applied to the 9000 km2 Upper Snake River Basin in Wyoming, USA as a test case. The method may be used with historical SNOTEL data to reconstruct snow depletion curves or maps for base periods preceding the availability of current satellite remote sensing, and with synthesized weather datasets for future periods associated with altered climate scenarios; the method may also be used in any current snowmelt season as model input to forecast snowmelt and improve streamflow forecasts.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85702", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85704" } }
{"authors":"Donald Blankenship::University of Texas at Austin--Cyril Grima::Institute for Geophysics--Duncan Young::University of Texas, Institute for Geophysics--Dustin Schroeder::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Krista Soderlund::Institute for Geophysics--Young Gim::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Jeffrey Plaut::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Gerald Patterson::Applied Physics Laboratory Johns Hopkins--Alina Moussessian::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"P53G-02: UNDERSTANDING EUROPA’S ICE SHELL AND SUBSURFACE WATER THROUGH TERESTRIAL ANALOGS FOR FLYBY RADAR SOUNDING", "abstract":"The recently approved NASA mission to Europa proposes to study this ice-covered moon of Jupiter though a series of fly-by observations of its surface and subsurface from a spacecraft in Jovian orbit. The science goal of this mission is to “explore Europa to investigate its habitability”. One of the primary instruments in the selected scientific payload is a multi-frequency, multi-channel ice penetrating radar system. The “Radar for Europa Assessment and Sounding: Ocean to Near-surface (REASON)” will play a critical role in achieving the mission’s habitability driven science objectives, which include characterizing the distribution of any shallow subsurface water, searching for an ice-ocean interface and evaluating a spectrum of ice-ocean-atmosphere exchange hypotheses. The development of successful measurement and data interpretation techniques for exploring Europa will need to leverage knowledge of analogous terrestrial environments and processes. Towards this end, we will discuss a range of terrestrial radioglaciological analogs for hypothesized physical, chemical, and biological processes on Europa and present airborne data collected with the University of Texas dual-frequency radar system over a variety of terrestrial targets. These targets include water filled fractures, brine rich ice, water lenses, accreted marine ice, and ice surfaces with roughness ranging from firn to crevasse fields and will provide context for understanding and optimizing the observable signature of these processes in future radar data collected at Europa.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85704", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85705" } }
{"authors":"Junchan Lee::KAIST Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology--", "title":"SA51A-2395: Estimation of topside electron density profile using on-orbit measured GPS and electron density data.", "abstract":"The topside ionophere have lacks of information about plasma, but it is important for human beings and scientific applicaiton. We establish an estimation method for electron density profile using Langmuir Probe and GPS data of CHAMP satellite and have comparision the method results with other satellites measurements. In order to develop the model, hydrostatic mapping function, vertical scale height, and vertical TEC(Total Electron Contents) are used for calculations. The electron density and GPS data with hydrostatic mapping function give the vertical TEC and after some algebra using exponential model of density profile give the vertical scale height of ionosphere. The scale height have about 10^2~10^3 km order of magnitude so it can be used exponential model again since the altitude of CHAMP. Therefore, apply the scale height to exponoential model we can get the topside electron density profile. The result of the density profile model can be compared with other satellite data as STSAT-1, ROCSAT, DMSP which is measured the electron density in similar Local Time, Latitude, Longitude but above the CHAMP. This comparison shows the method is accecptable and it can be applied to other reseach for topside ionosphere.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85705", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85707" } }
{"authors":"Jeremy Nowak::University of California Berkeley--Robert Weber::University of California Berkeley--Dana Loutey::University of California Berkeley--John Coates::University of California Berkeley--Allen Goldstein::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"B33B-0651: Molecular Characterization of Organic Indicators of Petroleum Biosouring", "abstract":"The production of sulfide in a petroleum reservoir by anaerobic sulfate reducing microorganisms (SRM) is environmentally, industrially, and epidemiologically hazardous. More knowledge is needed about the anaerobic respiration pathway of SRM in petroleum, and whether the activity of SRM could be effectively inhibited using nitrate or perchlorate treatments. In order to understand the molecular transformations and metabolic fingerprints of SRM in petroleum reservoirs, and how they are altered by nitrate or perchlorate treatments, the Coates and Goldstein Laboratories at UC-Berkeley have run controlled column incubation studies of petroleum from an oil reservoir. By using two dimensional gas chromatography (GCxGC) with high resolution time-of-flight mass spectrometry coupled to vacuum ultraviolet radiation at the Advanced Light Source (ALS) at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL), detailed chemical characterizations of hydrocarbons from approximately C9-C30 have been completed, separating the complete oil sample by number of carbon atoms and chemical classes (including normal alkanes, branched alkanes, number of alkyl rings, and number of aromatic rings) corresponding to petroleum transformations in sulfate, nitrate, and perchlorate reducing environments. Results demonstrate that the anaerobic pathway of SRM preferentially involves the transformation of heavier polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and that a large number of products are created that contain either two or four oxygen atoms, suggesting fumarate additions initialize the anaerobic process.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85707", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85708" } }
{"authors":"Callie Sendek::San Jose State University--Jade Star Lackey::Pomona College--Jonathan Miller::San Jose State University--Gareth Davies::Free University of Amsterdam--John Valley::University of Wisconsin Madison--Kouki Kitajima::University of Wisconsin--", "title":"V41D-04: Zircon Geochemical and Isotopic Constraints on the Evolution of the Mount Givens Pluton, Central Sierra Nevada Batholith", "abstract":"The Late Cretaceous Mt. Givens pluton (central Sierra Nevada batholith, CA) is noteworthy for its large size (≈1400 km2) and relative compositional and textural homogeneity. It has been proposed as a plutonic analog for ` monotonous intermediate`  ignimbrites. The pluton is characterized by a 30 km wide ellipse shaped northern lobe that connects with a long mass about 15 km wide and extending 50 km SE. The northern lobe was constructed over 7 m.y. (from 98 to 91 Ma) with progressively younger ages toward the interior. This inward younging is accompanied by transitions to more felsic compositions and from equigranular to K-spar porphyritic textures. The large elongated mass extending to the SE (ca. 95-91 Ma) is more homogeneous, mostly equigranular granodiorite with subordinate K-spar-phyric granodiorite. Small diorite intrusions (10's to 100's m2) are also present and locally mingle and hybridize with the host granodiorite. Unlike other Late Cretaceous zoned intrusions (the Sierra Crest intrusions), the equigranular, and K-spar porphyritic phases of the Givens have similar trace element characteristics. All zircons have high Ti-in-zircon model temperatures (850-1000 °C), pronounced negative Eu anomalies, and curved MREE and HREE patterns. These characteristics indicate that zircon grew early and that initial magmas were likely undersaturated in zircon. Significant within sample variations in δ18O (up to 1.5‰) and eHf (up to 8 units) require mixing of isotopically distinct magmas in the Givens magma system after they had begun crystallizing zircon, but well before solidification. O and Hf isotopic variation within the granodiorites shows distinct geographic variation, with higher δ18O and more negative eHf values along the western margin of the pluton. This trend is consistent with earlier work suggesting that the Givens intruded across the Panthalassan-North American lithospheric boundary.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85708", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85709" } }
{"authors":"Takenari Kinoshita::NICT National Institute of Information and Communications Technology--Yasuhiro Murayama::Integrated Science Data System Research Lab.--Seiji Kawamura::NICT National Institute of Information and Communications Technology--", "title":"SA13A-2331: A study of the modulation of semidiurnal tide associated with mesospheric gravity waves observed with Poker Flat MF radar", "abstract":"The neutral wind velocity data from mesosphere to lower thermosphere observed by MF radars at Poker Flat in Alaska has been observed since the late 1990s. The long-term wind velocity data at Poker Flat has been analyzed for 10 years of 1999 – 2008 to understand the coupling processes between mesospheric gravity waves and tidal waves in more detail. Climatological 1-day composite plots of semidiurnal components of zonal wind and GW-KE showed that the maximum of GW-KE occurs at Poker Flat when zonal wind is westward in winter. It was confirmed that the phases between semidiurnal components of zonal wind and GW-KE are locked for more than 10 days in several years. The present study focuses on the phase loch events and examines the modulation of background wind including tides due to gravity wave drags under an assumption that gravity waves dissipate and/or break when the GW-KE is large. As with previous studies (AGU2014, IUGG2015), observed wind velocities having the 1~4 hour period components are analyzed as short-period gravity waves and those having harmonic components with periods of 24, 12, and 8 hours are calculated every 30 minutes. The amplitude modulations of 12 hour components of zonal wind and GW-KE show that the time derivative of zonal wind is negative after the GW-KE has large amplitude during the phase lock events in winter of 1999, 2000, and 2004. We plan to discuss more detail of underlying the physical processes, focusing on the local modulation of tidal waves associated with gravity wave drags using not only observation data but also reanalysis and modeling data.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85709", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85710" } }
{"authors":"Asta Miklius::Hawaiian Volcano Observatory--Kyle Anderson::USGS--Ingrid Johanson::Hawaiian Volcano Observatory--Tim Orr::Hawaiian Volcano Observatory--Matthew Patrick::Hawaiian Volcano Observatory--Michael Poland::USGS Cascades Volcano Observatory--Weston Thelen::Hawaiian Volcano Observatory--", "title":"G41A-1002: A Tale of Two Reservoirs: Kı̄lauea’s April-May 2015 Events", "abstract":"The existence of multiple magma reservoirs beneath Kı̄lauea’s summit area is well known, but in May 2015, we had the unique opportunity to observe an instance of rapid magma exchange between reservoirs. The series of events began on April 22, with rapid inflation of the shallow (~1.5 km below the surface) reservoir near Halema‘uma‘u (HMM) Crater in Kı̄lauea Caldera. Inflation continued, at an exponentially decaying rate, for more than a week, while the lava lake within the vent in HMM rose about 40 m, overtopping its rim and spilling onto the crater floor. Inflation was accompanied by elevated seismicity in the caldera and especially in the upper East Rift Zone (UERZ). For a little more than a week after deformation rates slowed, the lava lake put on a spectacular show for hordes of appreciative onlookers, while intense seismicity kept Hawaiian Volcano Observatory staff on alert. On May 11, borehole tiltmeters began recording rapid deflation of the HMM reservoir, as lake level began to drop and earthquakes in the south caldera increased in rate and magnitude. Within a day, inflation in the south caldera was clear from tilt, GPS and InSAR data. The visual pattern of deformation and simple inverse modeling are consistent with the south caldera magma reservoir—a complex feature often imaged in the past, especially by leveling and InSAR—as the main source of this deformation. Inflation in the south caldera proceeded at an exponentially increasing rate for about 5 days. During this time, the lava lake level continued to drop to about 20 m below pre-April 22 levels, and seismicity in the UERZ waned. Our preliminary modeling suggests that the volume lost from the HMM reservoir and lava lake is comparable to that gained in the south caldera. This event provides a rare glimpse of rapid magma transfer between two subcaldera magma storage bodies, raising new questions about how these reservoirs are connected and offering the potential to further elucidate the geometry of Kilauea’s summit magma storage system.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85710", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85711" } }
{"authors":"Phillip Gans::University of California Santa Barbara--Robert Askew::University of Iceland--Thor Thordarson::University of Iceland--", "title":"T51G-2999: Middle Miocene rifting and volcanic history of the Berufjordor- Breiddalur region, eastern Iceland revealed by 40Ar/39Ar geochronology", "abstract":"Eighteen new 40Ar/39r incremental heating analyses of groundmass concentrates from fresh holocrystalline interiors of basalt lavas and dikes collected in an E-W, 35-km-long transect across the Berufjordor- Breiddalur region, eastern Iceland shed important new light on the Miocene spreading history and age of the Breiddalur central volcano. Despite fine-grain sizes and low K contents, most samples yield high quality ages (either simple plateaus or spectra indicative of modest recoil ± low T argon loss) with estimated uncertainties of ±0.1 to 0.2 Ma. Ages decrease monotonically westward in the eastern half of transect from 12.1 to 10.0 Ma over an 18 km distance, in excellent agreement with the estimated half spreading rate of 0.9 cm/yr. In contrast, the western 15 km of the transect (and ~ 1 km of “apparent” vertical succession), including lavas below, above and within the Breiddalur volcano shows no systematic westward younging - all lavas in this region range from 9.1 to 9.8 Ma. Ages from diabase dikes similarly range from 9.1 to 9.8 Ma, except one distinctly younger at 7.8 Ma. The simplest interpretation of the new age determinations is that up until ~9 Ma, a ≥15 km-wide rift zone/plate boundary was situated in the eastern half of the transect. The entire rift zone (including Breiddalur volcano) was then accreted to the Eurasian plate during a westward rift jump of ≥ 15 km. These types of minor jumps in the plate boundary and accretion of entire rift zones to one plate or the other may help explain the “excess width” of Iceland. Also, the data raise questions about the strict applicability of the Palmeson (1973) model, as in this case, a paleo rift zone is not reflected by a dip reversal, and “proximal” or within rift volcanic and plutonic rocks are well exposed at the present surface and are not buried by younger flows as the spreading center moves away.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85711", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85712" } }
{"authors":"Zhongming Chen::Peking University--Hao Liang::Peking University--Dao Huang::Zhejiang University--Liubin Huang::Peking University--Qinqin Wu::Peking University--Huihui Wu::Peking University--", "title":"A21B-0117: Observation and Modeling of Atmospheric Peroxyformic Acid", "abstract":"The existence and importance of peroxyformic acid (PFA) in the atmosphere has been under controversy. We present here, for the first time, the observation data for PFA from four field measurements carried out in China. These data provided powerful evidence that PFA can stay in the atmosphere, typically in dozens of pptv level. The relationship between PFA and other detected peroxides was examined. The results showed that PFA had a strong positive correlation with its homolog, peroxyacetic acid, due to their similar sources and sinks. Through an evaluation of PFA production and removal rates, we proposed that the reactions between peroxyformyl radical (HC(O)O2) and formaldehyde or the hydroperoxyl radical (HO2) were likely to be the major source and degradation into formic acid (FA) was likely to be the major sink for PFA. Based on a box model evaluation, we proposed that the HC(O)O2 and PFA chemistry was a major source for FA under low NOx conditions. Furthermore, it is found that the impact of the HC(O)O2 and PFA chemistry on radical cycling was dependent on the yield of HC(O)O2 radical from HC(O) + O2 reaction. When this yield exceeded 50%, the HC(O)O2 and PFA chemistry should not be neglected for calculating the radical budget. To make clear the exact importance of HC(O)O2 and PFA chemistry in the atmosphere, further kinetic, field and modeling studies are required.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85712", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85713" } }
{"authors":"Donald Blankenship::University of Texas at Austin--Jamin Greenbaum::University of Texas, Institute for Geophysics--Duncan Young::University of Texas, Institute for Geophysics--Thomas Richter::University of Texas at Austin--Jason Roberts::Australian Antarctic Division--Alan Aitken::University of Western Australia--Benoit Legresy::Australian Antarctic Division--Roland Warner::Australian Antarctic Division--Tas van Ommen::Australian Antarctic Division--Martin Siegert::Imperial College London--", "title":"C11D-07: Increased Ocean Access to Totten Glacier, East Antarctica", "abstract":"The Totten Glacier is the largest ice sheet outlet in East Antarctica, draining 3.5 meters of eustatic sea level potential from the Aurora Subglacial Basin (ASB) into the Sabrina Coast. Recent work has shown that the ASB has drained and filled many times since largescale glaciation began including evidence that it collapsed during the Pliocene. Steady thinning rates observed near Totten Glacier’s grounding line since the beginning of the satellite altimetry record are the largest in East Antarctica and the nature of the thinning suggests that it is driven by enhanced basal melting due to ocean processes . Warm Modified Circumpolar Deep Water (MCDW), which has been linked to glacier retreat in West Antarctica, has been observed in summer and winter on the Sabrina Coast continental shelf in the 400-500 m depth range. Using airborne geophysical data acquired over multiple years we delineate seafloor valleys connecting the inner continental shelf to the cavity beneath Totten Glacier that cut through a large sill centered along the ice shelf calving front. The sill shallows to depths of about 300 mbsl and was likely a grounding line pinning point during Holocene retreat, however, the two largest seafloor valleys are deeper than the observed range of thermocline depths. The deeper of the two valleys, a 4 km-wide trough, connects to the ice shelf cavity through an area of the coastline that was previously believed to be grounded but that our analysis demonstrates is floating, revealing a second, deeper entryway to ice shelf cavity. The previous coastline was charted using satellite-based mapping techniques that infer subglacial properties based on surface expression and behavior; the new geophysical analysis techniques we use enable inferences of subglacial characteristics using direct observations of the ice-water interface. The results indicate that Totten Glacier and, by extension, the Aurora Subglacial Basin are vulnerable to MCDW that has been observed on the nearby Sabrina Coast continental shelf by multiple shipborne expeditions beginning in 1996.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85713", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85714" } }
{"authors":"Sarah Martin::University of California Merced--Martha Conklin::University of California Merced--Fengjing Liu::Lincoln University--", "title":"H31D-1447: Source Water Flow Pathways In Forested, Mountain, Headwater Streams: A Link Between Sediment Movement Patterns And Stream Water Chemistry.", "abstract":"Three years of continuous and discrete sediment and water quality data, from four forested, mountain, headwater catchments in the Sierra Nevada, is used to identify water sources, determine the importance of sub-surface flow pathways, detect any changes in source waters due to seasonal variation or drought, and link flow pathways with observed patterns of in-channel sediment movement within the study watersheds. Patterns in stream chemistry and turbidity point to infiltration as the dominant flow pathway within these catchments. Data support a flow pathway conceptual model in which precipitation water infiltrates into the shallow or deeper subsurface, increasing the hydraulic head of the water table and pushing pre-event water into the stream ahead of event water. Study catchments contain perennial streams and are characterized by a Mediterranean climate with a distinct wet and dry season. Sites are located in the rain-snow transition zone with snow making up 40 to 60 percent of average annual precipitation. Barring human disturbances such as logging/grazing (compaction) or fire (hydrophobicity), catchment soils have high infiltration capacities. Springs and seeps maintain baseflow during the summer low-flow season, and shifting chemical signals within the streams indicate the increased importance of sub-surface water sources during drought years. End-member mixing analysis was conducted to identify possible water end members. Turbidity hysteresis patterns described by previous studies show in-channel sources are dominant for discharge events year round, and there is no difference in fine sediment delivery to streams with or without a soil protecting layer of snow on the land surface. The dominance of sub-surface water sources and evidence for infiltration flow fits with turbidity data, as little material is reaching the stream due to erosive overland flow. An understanding of flow pathways provides a foundation for sustainable land use management in forested, mountain systems.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85714", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85715" } }
{"authors":"Muhammad Sulaiman::University of Guelph--Claudia Wagner-Riddle::University of Guelph--Shannon Brown::University of Guelph--", "title":"B31B-0547: Comparing the Net Ecosystem Exchange of Two Cropping Systems for Dairy Feed Production", "abstract":"A three-year study was conducted from 2012 to 2014 to determine the net CO2 fluxes from corn and hay, the two main feed crops used in dairy production. The aim of this study is to better understand the net ecosystem exchange (NEE) in annual and perennial cropping systems used in dairy production to benefit greenhouse gas emission model developments and the life cycle analysis of dairy production. The study was conducted on two 4-ha plots where one plot was a 5-year old hayfield and the other plot was planted in a continuous cycle corn. All plots were continuously monitored using the flux-gradient method deployed with a tunable diode laser trace gas analyzer and sonic anemometers. All plots received dairy manure as fertilizer applied according to common practice. The cumulative NEE for the three years of the study was -873.15 g C m-2 for corn and -409.36 g C m-2 for hay. Differences in respiration between the two cropping systems was found to be the larger factor compared to differences in gross ecosystem production (GEP) that resulted in the contrasting cumulative NEE where cumulative respiration for the three years for hay was 3094.23 g C m-2 as opposed to 2078.11 g C m-2 for corn. Cumulative GEP for the three years was 3503.60 and 2951.31 g C m-2 for hay and corn respectively. Inter-annual and inter-crop variability of the NEE, GEP and respiration will be discussed in relation to biomass production, climatic conditions and crop physiological characteristics.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85715", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85716" } }
{"authors":"Ian Molnar::University of Western Ontario--Clinton Willson::Louisiana State University--Jason Gerhard::University of Western Ontario--Denis O'Carroll::University of Western Ontario--", "title":"H13P-08: Silver Nanoparticle Transport Through Soil: Illuminating the Pore-Scale Processes ", "abstract":"For nanoparticle transport through soil, the pore-scale (i.e., tens to hundreds of grains and pores) is a crucial intermediate scale which links nanoparticle-surface interactions with field-scale transport behaviour. However, very little information exists on how nanoparticles behave within real three-dimensional pore spaces. As a result, pore-scale processes are poorly characterized for nanoparticle systems and, subsequently, continuum-scale transport models struggle to describe commonly observed ‘anomalous’ behaviour such as extended tailing. This knowledge gap is due to two primary factors: an inability to experimentally observe nanoparticles within real pore spaces, and the computationally expensive models required to simulate nanoparticle movement. However, due to recent advances in Synchrotron X-Ray Computed Microtomography (SXCMT), it is now possible to quantify in-situ pore-scale nanoparticle concentrations during transport through real 3-dimensional porous media [1]. Employing this SXCMT quantification method to examine real nanoparticle/soil transport experiments has yielded new insights into the pore-scale processes governing nanoparticle transport. By coupling SXCMT nanoparticle quantification method with Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulations we are able to construct a better picture of how nanoparticles flow through real pore spaces. This talk presents SXCMT/CFD analyses of three silver nanoparticle transport experiments. Silver nanoparticles were flushed through three different sands to characterize the influence of grain distribution and retention rates on pore-scale flow and transport processes. These CFD/SXCMT analyses illuminate how processes such as temporary hydraulic retention govern nanoparticle transport. In addition, the observed distributions of pore water velocities and nanoparticle mass flow rates challenge the standard conceptual model of nanoparticle transport, suggesting that pore-scale processes require explicit consideration in order to fully describe nanoparticle ransport. References  1. Molnar, I.L., et al., Method for Obtaining Silver Nanoparticle Concentrations within a Porous Medium via Synchrotron X-ray Computed Microtomography. Environmental Science & Technology, 2014. 48(2): p. 1114-1122.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85716", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85717" } }
{"authors":"Serdar Bilgi::Istanbul Technical University--Yunus Kalkan::Istanbul Technical University--", "title":"NH51B-1888: Deformation Monitoring Studies and GPR Application on Dams", "abstract":"Some basic physical data are very important for assessing the safety and performance of dams. These are movement, water pressure, seepage, reservoir and tail-water elevations, local seismic activities, total pressure, stress and strain, internal concrete temperature, ambient temperature and precipitation. Dams and their surroundings have to be monitored by using essential methods at periodic time intervals in order to determine the possible changes that may occur over the time. Monitoring programs typically consist of; surveillance or visual observation. These programs on dams provide information for evaluating the dam’s performance related to the design intent and expected changes that could affect the safety performance of the dam. Additionally, these programs are used for investigating and evaluating the abnormal or degrading performance where any remedial action is necessary. Geodetic and non-geodetic methods are used for monitoring. Geometric changes at the dam surface and in the galleries are defined using geodetic methods. Physical and geometrical changes in embankment inside are defined using non-geodetic methods. This study provides information about the deformation monitoring techniques of the dams, dam safety and related analysis. The case study is the deformation monitoring of Atatürk Dam, 6th largest dam of world considering the reservoir volume, which was constructed on Euphrates (Fırat) River having importance for providing drinking water, hydroelectric power and irrigation. In the study, brief information is given about this dam and the methods of geodetic and non-geodetic deformation monitoring measurements applied by various disciplines. Bathymetric surveying techniques in the water covered area and Real Time Kinematic (RTK) GNSS surveying technique on the other area were used in order to determine the topography of the embankment and reservoir surfaces. Contour maps were drawn to determine the slumping and heaving areas. Also Ground-Penetrating-Radar (GPR) measurements and some results about the horizontal/vertical position of the upper surface of clay and padding thickness on the clay in three dimension were given. Some results about the geometrical changes on the embankment and its part under reservoir obtained from the eight years deformation measurements are given.Some basic physical data are very important for assessing the safety and performance of dams. These are movement, water pressure, seepage, reservoir and tail-water elevations, local seismic activities, total pressure, stress and strain, internal concrete temperature, ambient temperature and precipitation. Dams and their surroundings have to be monitored by using essential methods at periodic time intervals in order to determine the possible changes that may occur over the time. Monitoring programs typically consist of; surveillance or visual observation. These programs on dams provide information for evaluating the dam’s performance related to the design intent and expected changes that could affect the safety performance of the dam. Additionally, these programs are used for investigating and evaluating the abnormal or degrading performance where any remedial action is necessary. Geodetic and non-geodetic methods are used for monitoring. Geometric changes at the dam surface and in the galleries are defined using geodetic methods. Physical and geometrical changes in embankment inside are defined using non-geodetic methods. This study provides information about the deformation monitoring techniques of the dams, dam safety and related analysis. The case study is the deformation monitoring of Atatürk Dam, 6th largest dam of world considering the reservoir volume, which was constructed on Euphrates (Fırat) River having importance for providing drinking water, hydroelectric power and irrigation. In the study, brief information is given about this dam and the methods of geodetic and non-geodetic deformation monitoring measurements applied by various disciplines. Bathymetric surveying techniques in the water covered area and Real Time Kinematic (RTK) GNSS surveying technique on the other area were used in order to determine the topography of the embankment and reservoir surfaces. Contour maps were drawn to determine the slumping and heaving areas. Also Ground-Penetrating-Radar (GPR) measurements and some results about the horizontal/vertical position of the upper surface of clay and padding thickness on the clay in three dimension were given. Some results about the geometrical changes on the embankment and its part under reservoir obtained from the eight years deformation measurements are given.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85717", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85720" } }
{"authors":"Vincent Cronin::Baylor University--Charly Bank::University of Toronto--Peter Bobrowsky::Geological Survey of Canada--John Geissman::University of New Mexico Main Campus--Susan Kieffer::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--David Mogk::Montana State University--Cindy Palinkas::University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science Appalachian Laboratory--Catherine Pappas Maenz::Dawson College--Silvia Peppoloni::National Institute of Geophysics and Volcanology--Anne Marie Ryan::Dalhousie University--", "title":"PA23C-06: As Ethics is a Core Attribute of Science, So Geoethics Must Be at the Core of Geoscience", "abstract":"The daily quest of a geoscientist is to seek reliable information about Earth: its history, nature, materials, processes, resources and hazards. In science, reliable information is based on reproducible observations (scientific facts), and includes an estimate of uncertainty. All geoscientists share that basic quest, regardless of whether they wear a lab coat, business suit or field boots at work. All geoscientists also share a responsibility to serve society – the same society that invested in science and education, and thereby enabled the development of geoscience as well as the commercial ventures that utilize geoscience. What does society expect in return for that investment? It just wants the truth, along with a clear indication of the uncertainty. Society needs reliable geoscience information and expertise so that it can make good, informed decisions about resources, risk and our shared environment. Unreliable geoscience information, if represented as valid, might do irreparable harm. The authors represent the International Association for Promoting Geoethics (IAPG, www.geoethics.org), which seeks to develop and advance geoethics worldwide. Geoethics is based on the moral imperative for geoscientists to use our knowledge and expertise about Earth for the benefit of humankind. Informed by the geologic record of the intertwined history of life and our planet, that moral imperative extends beyond our time, our culture, and even our species. Ultimately, Earth is a small lifeboat in space. Geoscientists form the essential interface between our human society and Earth, and we must act for the health and benefit of both. Einstein wrote, “Truth is what stands the test of experience.” If geoscientists are unwilling to engage the public and to speak the truth about Earth, who else will assume that role? The challenges we face together – resources, energy, potable water, soil conservation, sea-level rise – are too serious for geoscientists to be mute. Voices motivated by narrow self-interest might fill the void left by our indifference. Our children’s children’s children will expect us to have done our job in our time: to be honest, to be good scientists, to provide reliable expertise about Earth, to help reorient society toward sustainability, and to pass on a healthy ecosystem to those who follow.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85720", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85721" } }
{"authors":"Tetsuo Matsuno::Earthquake Research Institute, University of Tokyo--Daisuke Suetsugu::JAMSTEC--Hisashi Utada::University of Tokyo--Kiyoshi Baba::University of Tokyo--Noriko Tada::JAMSTEC--Hisayoshi Shimizu::University of Tokyo--Hajime Shiobara::University of Tokyo--Takehi Isse::University of Tokyo--Hiroko Sugioka::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--Aki Ito::JAMSTEC--", "title":"DI11C-2620: The amount of water reserved in a “normal” oceanic mantle transition zone beneath the northwestern Pacific, inferred from data of coincident ocean bottom electromagnetic and seismic observations", "abstract":"` Is the mantle transition zone (MTZ) a major water reservoir of the Earth?`  To answer this question, we have inferred the amount of water reserved in a “normal” oceanic MTZ beneath the northwestern Pacific from electrical and seismic structures. The field experiment was conducted with arrays of ocean bottom electromagnetometers and broadband ocean bottom seismometers in 2010-2014. Our innovative ocean bottom instruments, Earth’s electric field observation system was used to measure time-variations of electric field with high S/N ratio at periods of >105s where the electromagnetic field is sensitive to the MTZ, and broadband ocean bottom seismometer of the next generation was used to record the earth motion with as low noise level as land stations. Electromagnetic data were first analyzed to derive MT and GDS response functions at periods of >105s. Then, model responses were numerically obtained from electrical conductivity models overlain by earth-surface land-ocean heterogeneity. Comparison between the observation and the prediction suggested that a MTZ electrical conductivity structure beneath the northwestern Pacific is similar to an averaged 1-D structure of the north Pacific [Shimizu et al., 2010]. Seismic data were analyzed through a P-wave receiver function method. Depths of 410 and 660 km discontinuities and thickness of the MTZ were variable by areas. The MTZ thickness beneath the southern part of Area A (northwest to the Shatsky Rise), 270 km, is larger a global average of 243 km [e.g., Flanagan & Shearer, 1989], while those beneath Area B (southeast to the Shatsky Rise), 241 and 248 km, are comparable to the average. The water content and a thermal structure in the MTZ beneath Area A were inferred from the data. First, a temperature perturbation was determined to -70~-150 K from the thickness perturbation of the MTZ. Then, a thermal structure for Area A is assumed to a structure [Katsura et al., 2010] with the temperature perturbation. Electrical conductivity models with variable water contents for the MTZ were constructed based on the thermal structure and conductivity measurements of hydrous wadsleyite and rigwoodite in laboratory [e.g., Yoshino & Katsura, 2010]. Comparisons of predictions from these models with the observation suggest that the maximum amount of water in the MTZ beneath Area A is 0.5 wt%.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85721", "section":"Earth's Deep Interior"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85722" } }
{"authors":"Irma Caraballo Álvarez::University of Puerto Rico Rio Piedras Campus--Juan Torres-Perez::NASA Ames Research Center--Maritza Barreto::University of Puerto Rico Rio Piedras Campus--", "title":"EP31C-1025: Spectral and Geological Characterization of Beach Components in Northern Puerto Rico", "abstract":"Understanding how changes in beach components may reflect beach processes is essential since variations along beach profiles can shed light on river and ocean processes influencing beach sedimentation and beachrock formation. It is likely these influences are related to beach proximity within the Río Grande de Manatí river mouth. Therefore, this study focuses on characterizing beach components at two sites in Manatí, Puerto Rico. Playa Machuca and Playa Tombolo, which are separated by eolianites, differ greatly in sediment size, mineralogy, and beachrock morphology. Several approaches were taken to geologically and spectrally characterize main beach components at each site. These approaches included field and microscopic laboratory identification, granulometry, and a comparison between remote sensing reflectance (Rrs) obtained with a field spectroradiometer and pre-existing spectral library signatures. Preliminary results indicate a positive correlation between each method. This study may help explore the possibility of using only Rrs to characterize beach and shallow submarine components for detailed image analysis and management of coastal features.This study focuses on characterizing beach components at two sites in Manatí, Puerto Rico. Playa Machuca and Playa Tombolo, two beaches that are separated by eolianites, differ greatly in sediment size and mineralogy, as well as in beachrock morphology. Understanding how changes in beach components may reflect beach processes is essential, since it is likely that differences are mostly related to each beaches’ proximity to the Río Grande de Manatí river mouth. Hence, changes in components along beach profiles can shed light on the river’s and the ocean’s influence on beach sedimentation and beachrock formation. Several approaches were taken to properly geologically and spectrally characterize the main beach components at each site. These approaches included field and microscopic laboratory identification, granulometry, and a comparison between remote sensing reflectance (Rrs) obtained with a field spectroradiometer and the ENVI spectral library. Preliminary results show a positive correlation between each method. This study may help explore the possibility of using only Rrs to characterize beach and shallow submarine components for detailed image analysis and management of coastal features.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85722", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85723" } }
{"authors":"Bhaskar Mitra::University of Arkansas--Supratim Basu::University of Arkansas--Daniel Bereznyakov::University of Massachusetts--Andy Pereira::University of Arkansas--Kusum Naithani::University of Arkansas--", "title":"B43H-0656: Improved Understanding of the Photosynthetic Response of Seven Rice Genotypes with Different Drought Sensitivity using Light and CO2 Response Curves", "abstract":"Drought across different agro-climatic regions of the world has the capacity to drastically impact the yield potential of rice. Consequently, there is growing interest in developing drought tolerant rice varieties with high yield. We parameterized two photosynthesis models based on light and CO2 response curves for seven different rice genotypes with different drought survival mechanisms: sensitive (Nipponbar, TEJ), resistance (Bengal, TRJ), avoidance by osmotic adjustment (Kaybonnet, TRJ; IRAT177, TRJ; N22, Aus; Vandana, Aus; and O Glabberrima, 316603). All rice genotypes were grown in greenhouse conditions (24 °C ± 3°C air temperature and ~ 600 μmol m-2 s-1 light intensity) with light/dark cycles of 10/14 h in water filled trays simulating flooded conditions. Measurements were conducted on fully grown plants (35 - 60 days old) under simulated flooded and drought conditions. Preliminary results have shown that the drought sensitive genotype, Nipponbare has the lowest photosynthetic carboxylation capacity (Vcmax) and a similar electron transport rate (Jmax) compared to the drought resistant genotype IRAT 177. Mitochondrial respiration (Rd) of all the genotypes were similar while quantum yield of the drought sensitive genotype was greater than that of the drought resistant genotypes. While both drought tolerant and drought sensitive rice genotypes have the same photosynthetic yield, from an irrigation perspective the former would require less ‘drop per grain’. This has enormous economic and management implications on account of dwindling water resources across the world due to drought.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85723", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85725" } }
{"authors":"Eung Seok Lee::Ohio University--Jesse Hastings::Ohio University--Yongje Kim::KIGAM Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources--", "title":"H42E-06:  Slow-release Permanganate Gel (SRP-G) for Groundwater Remediation: Spreading, Gelation, and Release in Porous and Low-Permeability Media", "abstract":"Dense nonaqueous phase liquids (DNAPLs) like trichloroethylene (TCE) serve as the most common form of groundwater pollution in the world. Pore-plugging by the solid oxidation product MnO2 and limited lateral dispersion of the oxidant are two common problems with existing in-situ chemical oxidation (ISCO) schemes that could be alleviated through the development of a delayed gelation method for oxidant delivery. The objective of the current study was to further develop and optimize slow-release permanganate gel (SRP-G), a solution comprising colloidal silica and KMnO4, as a novel low-cost treatment option for large and dilute TCE plumes in groundwater. Batch tests showed that gelation could be delayed through manipulation of KMnO4 concentration, pH, and silica particle size of the SRP-G solution. In flow-through columns and flow-tanks filled with saturated sands, silica concentration had little effect on the gelation lag stage and release rate, but increasing silica concentration was associated with increasing release duration. When compared to a pure KMnO4 solution, visual observations and [MnO4−] measurements from flow tank tests demonstrated that the SRP-G prolonged the release duration and enhanced lateral spreading of the oxidant.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85725", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85726" } }
{"authors":"Leslie Woodger::Dartmouth College--Robyn Millan::Dartmouth College--", "title":"SM41E-2544: Balloon Observations of Relativistic Electron Precipitation", "abstract":"Relativistic electron precipitation events lasting from minutes to hours have been observed by balloon-borne instrumentation since 1996. This collection of observations, including the recent BARREL observations, all occur in the noon to midnight sector. EMIC waves have been suggested as the precipitation mechanism for this type of event [Lorentzen et al., 2000 and Millan et al., 2002]. A recent study by Li et al., [2014] performed a case study which modeled the radiation belt relativistic electron pitch angle diffusion from EMIC waves which showed convincing agreement between the modeled results and the BARREL x-ray observations. A survey of the BARREL REP events suggests this type of precipitation is a very localized phenomena with most events only being observed by a single balloon at a time despite the extensive L-value and local time coverage of observations during the campaign. This result is consistent with the findings of Blum et al., [2013]. Furthermore, the balloon observations show local time energy dependence consistent with the SAMPEX observations reported by Comess et al, [2013]. In this work we address the following questions: based on the REP events observed by balloon-borne instrumentation, are these characteristics true for all identified REP events and does this support EMIC waves as the precipitation mechanism? Due to the localized region of precipitation, do these events represent a significant radiation belt loss process?", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85726", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85727" } }
{"authors":"Thomas Chaffee::California Institute of Technology--Joseph Kirschvink::California Institute of Technology--Atsuko Kobayashi::Earth-Life Science Institute--", "title":"GP51A-1308: Magnetic Dinner Salads: The Role of Biogenic Magnetite in Cryopreservation for Common Food Plants", "abstract":"Biogenically-precipitated magnetite has been found in organisms ranging from Bacteria, single-celled protists, and many of the animal phyla, where its major function is navigation and magnetoreception. To date there is but a single report of biogenic magnetite in plants (essentially, magnetoferritin), and that is in common grass (Festuca species, from Gajdardziska-Josifovska et. al. doi:10.1127/0935-1221/2001/0013/0863). Recent developments in cryopreservation suggest that ~ 1 mT, ~ 10 Hz oscillating magnetic fields can drastically reduce ice nucleation during freezing, promote supercooling, and minimize cellular damage in living tissues (e.g., Kaku et al., doi: 10.1016/j.cryobiol.2012.02.001). Kobayashi & Kirschvink (2014, doi:10.1016/j.cryobiol.2013.12.002) suggest that biogenic magnetite crystals could be the nucleating site for damaging ice crystals, and that they would be driven magneto-mechanically to rotate in those oscillating fields which could inhibit the ice crystal nucleation process. This prompted our investigation into the magnetite content of ordinary fruit and vegetable food products, as knowledge of the natural levels of biogenic magnetite in the human food supply could guide the selection of which foods might work for this type of cryopreservation. Our study involved a range of common foods including avocados, bananas, garlic, and apples. Samples were prepared in a clean lab environment kept free of contaminant particles, and subjected to a variety of standard rock-magnetic tests including IRM and ARM acquisition, and the corresponding Af demagnetization, on a standard 2G™ SRM. Results are consistent with moderately interacting single-domain magnetite (see figure), with moderate inter-particle interaction effects. Typical magnetite concentrations in these samples are in the range of .1 to 1 ng/g for room temperature samples, increasing to the range of 1-10 ng/g when measured frozen (to inhibit thermal rotation of small particles and clumps). If these are distributed as fine, single-domain particles they would constitute the largest mineral surface area in the tissues, (aside from amorphous silica phytoliths), and are therefore likely the site of ice crystal nucleation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85727", "section":"Geomagnetism and Paleomagnetism"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85728" } }
{"authors":"Jonathan Munnikhuis::University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill--Allen Glazner::University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill--Drew Coleman::Univ North Carolina--Ryan Mills::NASA--", "title":"V51G-3121: Sr and Pb isotopic geochemistry of feldspars and implications for the growth of megacrysts in plutonic settings.", "abstract":"Why megacrystic textures develop in silicic igneous rocks is still unknown. One hypothesis is that these crystals nucleate early in a magma chamber with a high liquid content. A supportive observation of this hypothesis is areas in plutons with high concentrations of megacrysts suggesting flow sorting. Another group of hypotheses suggest megacrystic textures form during protracted late-stage coarsening in a low-melt, interlocked matrix due to either thermal oscillations from incremental pluton emplacement, or Ostwald ripening. Isotopic analyses of large, euhedral K-feldspar megacrysts from the Cretaceous intrusive suites of the Sierra Nevada batholith (SNB) provide new insight into their origin. Megacrysts from the SNB reach the decimeter scale, are Or rich (85-90%), are perthitic, and host mineral inclusions of nearly all phases in the host rock. In-situ micro-drilling of transects, from core to rim, of the alkali feldspars provides material for Sr and Pb isotopic analyses by thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS). Preliminary 87Sr/86Sr(i)  isotopic data from samples from the Cathedral Peak Granodiorite, of the Tuolumne Intrusive Suite range from 0.706337 to 0.706452 (~1.6εSr) near the cores, whereas a sawtooth pattern with larger variability, 0.706179 to 0.706533 (~5εSr), occurs nears the rims. We interpret these preliminary data to indicate that the late portion of growth (i.e. crystal rim) was dominated by either cannibalism of small K-feldspar crystals with isotopic variability, or by addition of isotopically diverse late components to the magma. By comparing the Sr and Pb isotopic stratigraphy of megacrysts from a variety of rock matrices and different granitoids in the SNB isotopic trends can be evaluated to determine if crystals sizes are dependent on disequilibrium processes or grow at a steady state.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85728", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85729" } }
{"authors":"Katharyn Woods::Northern Arizona University--Christopher Schwalm::Northern Arizona University--Deborah Huntzinger::Northern Arizona University--Richard Massey::Northern Arizona University--Benjamin Poulter::Montana State University--Thomas Kolb::Northern Arizona University--", "title":"B51J-02: FLUXNET to MODIS: Connecting the dots to capture heterogenious biosphere metabolism", "abstract":"Eddy co-variance flux towers provide our most widely distributed network of direct observations for land-atmosphere carbon exchange. Carbon flux sensitivity analysis is a method that uses in situ networks to understand how ecosystems respond to changes in climatic variables. Flux towers concurrently observe key ecosystem metabolic processes (e..g. gross primary productivity) and micrometeorological variation, but only over small footprints. Remotely sensed vegetation indices from MODIS offer continuous observations of the vegetated land surface, but are less direct, as they are based on light use efficiency algorithms, and not on the ground observations. The marriage of these two data products offers an opportunity to validate remotely sensed indices with in situ observations and translate information derived from tower sites to globally gridded products. Here we provide correlations between Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI), Leaf Area Index (LAI) and MODIS gross primary production with FLUXNET derived estimates of gross primary production, respiration and net ecosystem exchange. We demonstrate remotely sensed vegetation products which have been transformed to gridded estimates of terrestrial biosphere metabolism on a regional-to-global scale. We demonstrate anomalies in gross primary production, respiration, and net ecosystem exchange as predicted by both MODIS-carbon flux sensitivities and meteorological driver-carbon flux sensitivities. We apply these sensitivities to recent extreme climatic events and demonstrate both our ability to capture changes in biosphere metabolism, and differences in the calculation of carbon flux anomalies based on method. The quantification of co-variation in these two methods of observation is important as it informs both how remotely sensed vegetation indices are correlated with on the ground tower observations, and with what certainty we can expand these observations and relationships.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85729", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85730" } }
{"authors":"Guido Salvucci::Boston University--Angela Rigden::Boston University--", "title":"H33L-07: Surface vapor conductance derived from the ETRHEQ: Dependence on environmental variables and similarity to Oren’s stomatal stress model for vapor pressure deficit", "abstract":"Daily time series of evapotranspiration and surface conductance to water vapor were estimated using the ETRHEQ method (Evapotranspiration from Relative Humidity at Equilibrium). ETRHEQ has been previously compared with ameriflux site-level measurements of ET at daily and seasonal time scales, with watershed water balance estimates, and with various benchmark ET data sets. The ETRHEQ method uses meteorological data collected at common weather stations and estimates the surface conductance by minimizing the vertical variance of the calculated relative humidity profile averaged over the day. The key advantage of the ETRHEQ method is that it does not require knowledge of the surface state (soil moisture, stomatal conductance, leaf are index, etc.) or site-specific calibration. The daily estimates of conductance from 229 weather stations for 53 years were analyzed for dependence on environmental variables known to impact stomatal conductance and soil diffusivity: surface temperature, surface vapor pressure deficit, solar radiation, antecedent precipitation (as a surrogate for soil moisture), and a seasonal vegetation greenness index. At each site the summertime (JJAS) conductance values estimated from ETRHEQ were fitted to a multiplicate Jarvis-type stress model. Functional dependence was not proscribed, but instead fitted using flexible piecewise-linear splines. The resulting stress functions reproduce the time series of conductance across a wide range of ecosystems and climates. The VPD stress term resembles that proposed by Oren (i.e., 1-m*log(VPD) ), with VPD measured in kilopascals. The equivalent value of m derived from our spline-fits at each station varied over a remarkably small range of 0.58 to 0.62, in agreement with Oren’s original analysis based on leaf and tree-level measurements.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85730", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85731" } }
{"authors":"Jonathan Wang::Boston University--Mark Friedl::Boston University--Lucy Hutyra::Boston University--Brady Hardiman::Boston University--", "title":"A21G-0223: A Remote Sensing-based Characterization of the Urban Heat Island and its Implications for Modeled Estimates of Urban Biogenic Carbon Fluxes in Boston, MA.", "abstract":"Urban land use occupies a small but critical proportion of global land area for the carbon cycle, and in the coming decades, urban land area is expected to nearly double. Conversion of natural land cover to urban land cover imposes myriad ecological effects, including increased land surface and air temperatures via the urban heat island effect. In this study, we characterize the seasonal and spatial characteristics of the urban heat island over Boston, MA and estimate its consequences on biogenic carbon fluxes with a remote sensing-based model. Using a 12-year time series of emissivity- and atmospherically-corrected land surface temperatures from Landsat TM and ETM+ imagery, we find a high degree of spatial heterogeneity and consistent seasonal patterns in the thermal properties of Boston, controlled mainly by variations in vegetative cover. Field measurements of surface air temperature across an urbanization gradient show season- and vegetation-dependent patterns consistent with those observed in the Landsat data. With a fused data set that combines surface air temperature, MODIS, and Landsat observations, we modify and run the Vegetation Photosynthesis and Respiration Model (VPRM) to explore 1) how elevated temperatures affect diurnal and seasonal patterns of hourly urban biogenic carbon fluxes in Massachusetts in 2013 and 2014 and 2) to what extent these fluxes follow spatial patterns found in the urban heat island. Model modifications simulate the ecological effects of urbanization, including empirical adjustments to reanalysis-driven air temperatures (up to 5 K) and ecosystem respiration reduced by impervious surface area. Model results reveal spatio-temporal patterns consistent with strong land use and vegetation cover controls on biogenic carbon fluxes, with non-trivial biogenic annual net ecosystem exchange occurring in urban and suburban areas (up to -2.5 MgC/ha/yr). We specifically consider the feedbacks between Boston’s urban heat island and landscape phenology and explore the role of phenology in biogenic carbon uptake and release in urban areas. While most remote sensing-based models assume zero biogenic fluxes over urban, suburban, and exurban areas, our results suggest that live biomass in urban areas plays an important role in regional carbon budgets and should not be ignored.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85731", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85732" } }
{"authors":"Tokuta Yokohata::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Katsumasa Tanaka::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Kazuya Nishina::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Kiyoshi Takahashi::NIES National Institute for Environmental Studies--Seita Emori::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Masashi Kiguchi::University of Tokyo--Yoshihiko Iseri::Tokyo Institute of Technology--Yasushi Honda::University of Tsukuba--Masashi Okada::Agro-Meteorology Division, National Institute for Agro-Environmental Sciences--Yoshimitsu Masaki::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Akitomo Yamamoto::Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute University of Tokyo--Masahito Shigemitsu::Hokkaido University--Masakazu Yoshimori::The University of Tokyo--Tetsuo Sueyoshi::NIPR National Institute of Polar Research--Naota Hanasaki::NIES National Institute for Environmental Studies--Akihiko Ito::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Gen Sakurai::NIAES National Institute for Agro-Environmental Sciences--Toshichika Iizumi::NIAES National Institute for Agro-Environmental Sciences--Motoki Nishimori::NIAES--Wee Hoo Lim::Oxford University--Chihiro Miyazaki::Tokyo Institute of Technology--Shinjiro Kanae::Tokyo Institute of Technology--Taikan Oki::University of Tokyo--", "title":"PA31B-2162: Visualizing interconnections among climate risks", "abstract":"It is now widely recognized that climate change is affecting various sectors of the world. Climate change impact on one sector may spread out to other sectors including those seemingly remote, which we call “interconnections of climate risks”. While a number of climate risks have been identified in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fifth Assessment Report (AR5), there has been no attempt to explore their interconnections comprehensively. Here we present a first and most exhaustive visualization of climate risks drawn based on a systematic literature survey. Our risk network diagrams depict that changes in the climate system impact natural capitals (terrestrial water, crop, and agricultural land) as well as social infrastructures, influencing the socio-economic system and ultimately our access to food, water, and energy. Our findings suggest the importance of incorporating climate risk interconnections into impact and vulnerability assessments and call into question the widely used damage function approaches, which address a limited number of climate change impacts in isolation. Furthermore, the diagram is useful to educate decision makers, stakeholders, and general public about cascading risks that can be triggered by the climate change. Socio-economic activities today are becoming increasingly more inter-dependent because of the rapid technological progress, urbanization, and the globalization among others. Equally complex is the ecosystem that is susceptible to climate change, which comprises interwoven processes affecting one another. In the context of climate change, a number of climate risks have been identified and classified according to regions and sectors. These reports, however, did not fully address the inter-relations among risks because of the complexity inherent in this issue. Climate risks may ripple through sectors in the present inter-dependent world, posing a challenge ahead of us to maintain the resilience of the system. It is therefore imperative to improve our understanding on how climate change may induce a chain of impacts. Our study is a first step toward this goal by mapping out climate risks and their cause-effect relationships based on current literature.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85732", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85734" } }
{"authors":"Guangliang Wu::University of Texas at Austin University of Texas at Austin--Luc Lavier::Jackson School of Geosciences--", "title":"T51F-2970: Extension of a double-wedged orogen potentially leads to the current South China Sea", "abstract":"The South China Sea (SCS) is surrounded by South China on the NW, Palawan and Reed Bank on the SE, as well as several microplates, resembling a jigsaw puzzle. In an attempt to better understand its evolution, we designed simplified thermomechanical models to simulate extension of a double-wedge-shaped orogen with highlands on both sides and lowland in the center to mimic the geological condition of the proto-SCS. We imposed constant extension rates on both sides and Gaussian-shaped thermal impulse in the center. We also varied the strength of lower crust but did not explicitly incorporate mid-ocean ridges and searfloor spreading mechanisms. We currently used symmetric double-wedge, but further tests are planed for asymmetric double-wedges. Our preliminary results show that the models produced many structures that resemble those of SCS, such as 1) a series of domino or conjugate faults sitting above a subsurface detachment (or décollement), 2) exhumed domes of middle-lower crust, 3) extreme thinning of both upper crust and lower crust, and 4) propagation of extension towards NW and SE margins. Our models suggest that superimposition of these modeled characteristics produced during several phases of extension of the SCS that may be due to thermal impulsion, magmatic events, and subduction related relaxation potentially produces high resemblance of the SCS.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85734", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85735" } }
{"authors":"John Helms::Morningside College--Donna Glinski::Environmental Protection Agency Athens--Ralph Mead::University of North Carolina Wilmington--Melissa Southwell::Flagler College--Gene Avery::University of North Carolina Wilmington--Robert Kieber::University of North Carolina Wilmington--Stephen Skrabal::Univ North Carolina Wilmington--", "title":"B23D-0633: Photochemical dissolution of organic matter from resuspended sediments: Impact of source and diagenetic state on photorelease", "abstract":"Resuspended sediments exposed to simulated solar radiation release dissolved organic carbon (DOC). However, it is unclear how the provenance of sedimentary organic matter (OM) impacts this photorelease. In the first geographically extensive study of this phenomenon, twenty three size fractionated, fine grained sediments (< ca. 10–20 μm) from a variety of drainage basins were resuspended (at suspended solid loading of 29– 255 mg/l) and exhibited a net photochemical DOC release ranging from 2 to 178 μmol/g/h. There was a logarithmic increase in photoreleased DOC vs. the proportion of sedimentary OC (%), most likely due to photon limitation at high sedimentary OC loading (i.e. high mass-specific absorption limiting light penetration). Sediment source and quality – determined using lipid biomarkers – had a significant effect on DOC photorelease. The fatty acid terrestrial aquatic ratio (TARFA) indicated that terrestrially derived sediments exhibited relatively greater DOC photorelease. The long chain carbon preference index (CPI24–34) indicated that diagenetically unaltered terrestrial OM photoreleased more DOC than diagenetically altered terrestrial OM. The short chain carbon preference index (CPI14–22) demonstrated that sediments containing diagenetically altered planktonic or algal derived OM had a greater photorelease rate of DOC than fresh algal OM. This suggests that humic substances (humus and/or adsorbed humic and fulvic acids) play an important role in the photochemical dissolution of OC regardless of whether or not they are imported from upstream (i.e. terrestrial humics) or generated within the depositional or sedimentary environment (i.e. humification of algal dissolved OM).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85735", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85738" } }
{"authors":"Glynis Lough::U.S. Global Change Research Program--Emily Cloyd::National Climate Assessment--", "title":"PA13A-2186: Making Information Useful: Engagement in the Sustained National Climate Assessment Process", "abstract":"Creation of actionable information requires that the producers of that information understand the needs of the intended users and decision makers. To that end, the U.S. Global Change Research Program’s sustained National Climate Assessment process includes a focus on engaging users through an inclusive, broad-based, and ongoing process. Such a process provides opportunities for scientific experts and decision makers to share knowledge about the climate-related issues, impacts, and potential response actions that are most important in a particular region or sector. Such a process is also highly transparent in order to produce results that are credible, salient, and legitimate for both scientists and decision makers, ultimately making the results extremely useful. To implement these principles, USGCRP implements a broad-based engagement strategy that invites participation from users and stakeholder communities and considers methods for communicating with potential users at every step. The strategy elicits contributions to help shape the framing of the assessment process and products, improve the transparency of the process, and increase the utility of the final information. Specific user inputs are gathered through workshops, public comment opportunities, town hall meetings, presentations, requests for information, submitted documents, and open meetings. Further, a network of contributors self-organizes around topics of interest to extend assessment activities to a wider range of user groups. Here, we describe the outcomes of these innovations in assessment engagement and identify clear successes, notable surprises, future evaluation needs, and areas for new ideas.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85738", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85739" } }
{"authors":"Gudni Rosenkjaer::University of British Columbia--Lindsey Heagy::University of British Columbia--Rowan Cockett::University of British Columbia--Seogi Kang::University of British Columbia--", "title":"V12B-08: Using simpegMT to demonstrate a modular modelling and inversion framework applied in a workflow for a hydrothermal system", "abstract":"The MagnetoTelluric (MT) method is widely used in geophysical exploration, especially in geothermal exploration. The extensive frequency range allows mapping the resistivity structure to greater depths than typically achieved using controlled sources (on the order of 10 km’s). This is advantageous in identifying structures of interest, such as those related to hydrothermal alterations in a geothermal system and the heat source of the system. To obtain information about subsurface resistivity structures from MT data, an inversion modelling is commonly performed. The goal of an inversion is to recover a resistivity model that explains the data (within a degree of accuracy), given sets of constraints on the model. An attention to detail, often through an iterative process, is required during the inversion. A workflow that is transparent and repeatable is important for addressing the complexities encountered in an inversion and make the iterative process more effective. In this presentation, we will show examples of a workflow for an inversion of MT data from the Krysuvik geothermal area in Iceland. The workflow is implemented as a Python script, where the SimPEG framework (http://simpeg.xyz) is used to implement an open-source code base to work with MT data . The SimPEG framework uses finite-volume discretizations for structured and semi-structured meshes and has built-in routines for optimization and regularization. By structuring and writing the simpegMT code in compliance with the modular, object-oriented framework of SimPEG, full compatibility is achieved and its functions can be leveraged directly. Further, the structure facilitates interoperability with other problem-types, streamlines testing and fosters cooperations between developers and users of the code. We will step through the workflow, where varying complexity leads to a recovery of 3D models of different detail. We show how we guide steps in the workflow based on the preceding results, iteratively building our knowledge and incorporating it to converge to an improved resulting resistivity model. We will discuss the issues that arise and choices made in the workflow, interpret our resistivity model in terms of relevant structures and visualize along with other data sources from the area.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85739", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85740" } }
{"authors":"Myung-Sook Park::Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology--Minsang Kim::Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology--Myong-In Lee::Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology--Jungho Im::Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology--", "title":"A43L-03: Objective Detection of Tropical Cyclone Formation from Remotely-sensed Ocean Surface Wind Using Machine Learning Approaches", "abstract":"While recent microwave remote sensing has provided opportunities to retrieve ocean surface wind in many developing and non-developing disturbances, current application to detection of tropical cyclone (TC) at genesis stage remains qualitative and subjective. For the best use of the microwave-sensed low-level dynamics, this study develops new objective detection techniques of TC genesis with machine learning approaches from WindSat data. Dynamical and hydrological factors related to TC genesis have been defined from 325 developing and 974 non-developing Windsat wind/precipitation images for 2005-2009. In particular, degrees of symmetry in the ocean-surface circulation are quantified from circular variances (CVs), to measure a spread of wind angles, and the degree of organization of strong wind (rainfall) is newly defined using a Spatial Pattern Analysis Program for Categrical Maps called as FRGSTATS. Also, system strength and convective vigor are represented by the averages of wind speeds and rainfall, respectively. Applying the invented WindSat-derived predictors (2005-2007) to two machine learning approaches, decision tree (DT) and random forecast (RF), constructs objective detection techniques of TC genesis. Both results commonly show the symmetry and the intensity of ocean surface circulation are the most important than other predictors. Despite of inherent sampling issues of the polar orbiting satellite, hindcast validation with DT (RF) for 2008-2009 years show that a positive rate of detection is approximately 95.3% (83.7%) with false alarm rate 28.4% (11.1%). Accordingly, this study emphasizes new capability of the microwave-sensed dynamical information for objective detection of TC genesis.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85740", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85741" } }
{"authors":"Joseph Shea::International Center for Integrated Mountain Development--Silvan Ragettli::ETH Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich--Wouter Immerzeel::Utrecht University--Francesca Pellicciotti::ETH Zurich--Evan Miles::Scott Polar Research Institute--Jakob Steiner::ETH Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich--Pascal Buri::ETH Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich--Philip Kraaijenbrink::Utrecht University--", "title":"C43F-08: After the Earthquake: Impacts of Seismic Snow and Ice Redistribution in Langtang Valley, Nepal, on Glacier Mass Balances and Hydrological Regimes", "abstract":"The magnitude 7.8 Gorkha Earthquake that struck Nepal on 25 April 2015 resulted in a catastrophic loss of life and property, and had major impacts in high mountain areas. The earthquake resulted in a number of massive ice avalanches in Langtang Valley that destroyed entire villages and killed over 300 people. We first conduct a remote sensing analysis of the entire catchment, and attempt to quantify the volumes of snow and ice redistributed through high-resolution optical imagery, thermal imagery, and DEM differencing. Where data are available we examine the impact on the surface mass balances of four major glaciers (Lirung, Shalbachaum, Langtang and Langshisha). Finally, we use the physically-based and fully distributed TOPKAPI model to simulate the impacts of the co-seismic snow and ice redistribution on the hydrology of the Langtang River.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85741", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85742" } }
{"authors":"Kelly Thomson::University of Texas at Austin--Daniel Stockli::University of Texas at Austin--Julian Clark::Statoil Gulf ASA--Cai Puigdefabregas::University of Barcelona--Andrea Fildani::Statoil Gulf ASA--", "title":"V53D-3153: High-Resolution Detrital Zircon Geo- and Thermochronometry of the Eocene Ainsa Basin, South Central Pyrenees, Spain", "abstract":"Foreland basin deposits in the South Central Pyrenees provide a natural laboratory for investigating the interplay between tectonic and sedimentary processes. Early Cenozoic foreland basin deposits preserve the record of hinterland erosion throughout Pyrenean collision. This study uses high-resolution detrital zircon (DZ) geo- and thermochronometry to investigate the progressive evolution of sediment provenance and paleodrainages through the stratigraphic record and across different depozones of the foreland basin. The Ainsa Basin in the South Central Pyrenees contains a secession of Eocene turbidite packages sampled in detail to examine the transition from fluvial to shelf-slope to deep marine environments. New data are congruent with previous DZ studies showing the turbidites are mixed from two main sources, Hercynian plutons from the Pyrenean axial zone and Cadomian/Caledonian plutonic and metamorphic rocks exposed in the Eastern Pyrenees. Although many of the turbidite packages yield similar DZ U-Pb signatures, detailed DZ U-Pb-He double dating resolves subtle differences between stratigraphic packages. These differences likely reflect varying degrees of mixing of multiple sources, or autogenic sorting during transport. Some units yield anomalous DZ U-Pb distributions, which potentially indicate an additional source region. Studying these anomalies will better our understanding of processes such as sediment bypass in marine canyons and fluvio-deltaic depozones as well as axial vs transverse paleodrainages. Also these anomalous signals can be traced throughout depozones in the basin and used to refine stratigraphic correlations between different parts of the basin. The data, Interpreted in the context of the structural and stratigraphic framework of the Pyrenean foreland basin, provide insights into processes during sediment delivery, paleodrainage networks, and the interplay between tectonic deformation and basin sedimentation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85742", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85743" } }
{"authors":"Qiuru Zhang::Wuhan University--Liangsheng Shi::Wuhan University--", "title":"H51G-1469: Data Assimilation of Unsaturated Flow: Considering the Vertical Measurement Scale of Soil Moisture", "abstract":"Soil moisture data measured by various techniques has been widely used in unsaturated flow data assimilation, while the effect of vertical measurement depth (or scale) of soil moisture on model prediction and parameter estimation has not been quantitatively investigated. This study adopts the ensemble Kalman filter (EnKF) to assimilate surface soil moisture data of different observation depths into a one-dimensional variably-saturated water flow model, to estimate soil hydraulic parameters and soil moisture profiles. Through a few synthetic experiments, two factors are considered: soil heterogeneity and upper boundary conditions. Results show that as the heterogeneity of soil increases, the affecting depth of surface soil moisture decreases, and the observation with a larger depth is advantageous. For homogenous soil, soil moisture data with a smaller scale leads to better estimation of soil hydraulic parameters and soil moisture profiles. For heterogeneous soil, surface soil moisture exerts less or no influence on deeper layers. It is thus not able to estimate multiple parameters simultaneously by only assimilating surface soil moisture data in heterogeneous soil. It is found that regardless of the measurement scale, the estimated average soil moisture within the measurement scale matches well with the measurements at the corresponding scale. The accuracy of soil moisture profiles retrieval and soil hydraulic parameter estimation also depends on the upper boundary conditions. Flow regimes controlled by upward fluxes are found less successful, as the observed surface data may be no longer useful to infer the hydrologic processes in the deep soil, and, the observation with a larger scale tends to be more useful to reveal the relationship between surface soil moisture and deeper layer soil moisture. Our results show that the soil moisture with smaller depths is more effective to estimate soil moisture and soil hydraulic parameters of surface layer, while the soil moisture with larger depths is more helpful to interpret the correlation between surface soil moisture and deeper layer soil moisture.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85743", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85746" } }
{"authors":"Luis Gallardo::CICESE--Ewa Glowacka::CICESE National Center for Scientific Research and Higher Education of Mexico--Olga Sarychikhina::CICESE National Center for Scientific Research and Higher Education of Mexico--", "title":"G41A-0993: Inverse modeling of InSAR and ground leveling data for 3D volumetric strain distribution", "abstract":"Wide availability of modern Interferometric Synthetic aperture Radar (InSAR) data have made possible the extensive observation of differential surface displacements and are becoming an efficient tool for the detailed monitoring of terrain subsidence associated to reservoir dynamics, volcanic deformation and active tectonism. Unfortunately, this increasing popularity has not been matched by the availability of automated codes to estimate underground deformation, since many of them still rely on trial-error subsurface model building strategies. We posit that an efficient algorithm for the volumetric modeling of differential surface displacements should match the availability of current leveling and InSAR data and have developed an algorithm for the joint inversion of ground leveling and dInSAR data in 3D. We assume the ground displacements are originated by a stress free-volume strain distribution in a homogeneous elastic media and determined the displacement field associated to an ensemble of rectangular prisms. This formulation is then used to develop a 3D conjugate gradient inversion code that searches for the three-dimensional distribution of the volumetric strains that predict InSAR and leveling surface displacements simultaneously. The algorithm is regularized applying discontinuos first and zero order Thikonov constraints. For efficiency, the resulting computational code takes advantage of the resulting convolution integral associated to the deformation field and some basic tools for multithreading parallelization. We extensively test our algorithm on leveling and InSAR test and field data of the Northwest of Mexico and compare to some feasible geological scenarios of underground deformation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85746", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85747" } }
{"authors":"Elena Provornikova::US Naval Research Laboratory--John Laming::US Naval Research Laboratory--Vyacheslav Lukin::National Science Foundation--", "title":"SH54A-03: Prospects for Fermi Particle Acceleration at Coronal Magnetic Reconnection Sites", "abstract":"The mechanism of first order Fermi acceleration of particles interacting with the converging magnetized flows at a reconnection site was introduced recently in an attempt to predict the energy distribution of particles resulting from violent reconnection in galactic microquasars. More careful consideration of this mechanism showed that the spectral index of accelerated particles is related to the total plasma compression within a reconnection region, similar to that in the formulation for diffusive shock acceleration. In the solar context, reconnection regions producing strong compression could be the source of suprathermal “seed particles”. A hard spectrum of such suprathermal particles is believed to be necessary to initiate the particle acceleration process at low Mach number coronal mass ejection shocks close to the Sun where the gradual solar energetic particle events originate. As a first step to investigate the efficiency of Fermi acceleration, we explore the degree of plasma compression that can be achieved at reconnection sites in the solar corona. This work presents a set of 2D two-temperature resistive MHD simulations of the dynamics of several magnetic configurations within a range of lower corona plasma parameters. Energy transport processes in the MHD model include anisotropic thermal conduction for electrons and ions and radiative cooling. Magnetic configurations considered are a Harris current sheet, a force-free current sheet, a flux rope sitting above an arcade of magnetic loops, and two merging flux ropes. We demonstrate that only for some magnetic topologies, corresponding in particular to 3D magnetic nulls, the compression ratio, sufficient for first order Fermi acceleration in the reconnection region, can be achieved. These represent the potential sites in the solar corona where a hard seed particle energetic spectrum could be produced.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85747", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85748" } }
{"authors":"William Stringfellow::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory University of the Pacific--Mary Kay Camarillo::University of the Pacific--Jeremy Domen::University of the Pacific--Whitney Sandelin::University of the Pacific--Charukela Varadharajan::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Heather Cooley::Pacific Institute--Preston Jordan::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Matthew Heberger::Pacific Institute--Matthew Reagan::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--James Houseworth::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Jens Birkholzer::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--", "title":"H31E-1463: Treatment Process Requirements for Waters Containing Hydraulic Fracturing Chemicals", "abstract":"A wide variety of chemical additives are used as part of the hydraulic fracturing (HyF) process. There is concern that HyF chemicals will be released into the environment and contaminate drinking water, agricultural water, or other water used for beneficial purposes. There is also interest in using produced water (water extracted from the subsurface during oil and gas production) for irrigation and other beneficial purposes, especially in the arid Southwest US. Reuse of produced water is not speculative: produced water can be low in salts and is being used in California for irrigation after minimal treatment. In this study, we identified chemicals that are used for hydraulic fracturing in California and conducted an analysis to determine if those chemicals would be removed by a variety of technically available treatment processes, including oil/water separation, air stripping, a variety of sorption media, advanced oxidation, biological treatment, and a variety of membrane treatment systems. The approach taken was to establish major physiochemical properties for individual chemicals (log Koc, Henry’s constant, biodegradability, etc.), group chemicals by function (e.g corrosion inhibition, biocides), and use those properties to predict the fate of chemical additives in a treatment process. Results from this analysis is interpreted in the context of what is known about existing systems for the treatment of produced water before beneficial reuse, which includes a range of treatment systems from oil/water separators (the most common treatment) to sophisticated treatment trains used for purifying produced water for groundwater recharge. The results show that most HyF chemical additives will not be removed in existing treatment systems, but that more sophisticated treatment trains can be designed to remove additives before beneficial reuse.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85748", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85749" } }
{"authors":"Hiroshi Takebayashi::Disaster Prevention Research Institute, Kyoto University--Shinji Egashira::ICHARM International Centre for Water Hazard And Risk Management--Masaharu Fujita::Disaster Prevention Research Institute, Kyoto University--", "title":"NH13D-1965: Mud Flow Characteristics Occurred in Izuoshima Island, 2013", "abstract":"Landslides and mud flows were occurred in the west part of the Izuoshima Island, Japan on 16 October 2013. The Izuoshima Island is a volcanic island and the land surface is covered by the volcanic ash sediment in 1m depth. Hence, the mud flow with high sediment concentration was formed. The laminar layer is formed in the debris flow from the bed to the fluid surface. On the other hand, the laminar flow is restricted near the bed in the mud flow and the turbulence flow is formed on the laminar flow layer. As a result, the equilibrium slope of the mud flow becomes smaller comparing to the debris flow. In this study, the numerical analysis mud flow model considering the effect of turbulence flow on the equilibrium slope of the mud flow is developed. Subsequently, the model is applied to the mud flow occurred in the Izuoshima Island and discussed the applicability of the model and the flow characteristics of the mud flow. The differences of the horizontal flow areas between the simulated results and the field data are compared and it was found that the outline of the horizontal shape of the flow areas is reproduced well. Furthermore, the horizontal distribution of the erosion and deposition area is reproduced by the numerical analysis well except for the residential area (Kandachi area). Kandachi area is judged as the erosion area by the field observation, but the sediment was deposited in the numerical analysis. It is considered that the 1.5hour heavy rain over 100mm/h after the mud flow makes the discrepancy. The difference of the horizontal distribution of the maximum flow surface elevation between the simulated results and the field data are compared and it was found that the simulated flow depth is overestimated slightly, because of the wider erosion area due to the coarse resolution elevation data. The averaged velocity and the depth of the mud flow was enough large to collapse the houses.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85749", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85750" } }
{"authors":"Sarah Sams::Vanderbilt University--Daniel Morgan::Vanderbilt University--Greg Balco::Berkeley Geochronology Center--Jaakko Putkonen::University of North Dakota--Ted Bibby::University of North Dakota--", "title":"PP11A-2213: Applications of Cosmogenic He-3 and Ne-21 Dating to Glacial Moraines in Antarctica and California", "abstract":"The depositional age of moraines can be determined through cosmogenic nuclide exposure dating. These ages are useful in establishing a glacial history of an area and ascribing age constraints to transport processes. Be-10 is the most common nuclide used for exposure dating today, but this method is both expensive and time consuming because it requires analysis by accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS). He-3 and Ne-21 can be analyzed using noble gas mass spectrometry, which is more cost efficient than AMS and requires less chemical preparation. We collected samples from areas in Moraine Canyon, Antarctica (86.10° S, 157.75° W), which is a dry valley in the Transantarctic Mountains. Dolerite boulders along a transect of recessional moraines were sampled in the typical fashion of using a large piece of the boulder for analysis. Pyroxene minerals have been separated from these samples following the method of Bromley et al. (2014) using hydrofluoric acid. Exposure ages will be calculated from the He-3 concentrations in them. In the Mono Lake area of California, moraines were sampled from Bloody Canyon and McGee Creek sites. Instead of collecting a sample from an individual boulder, we collected approximately 25 granitic pebbles (1-3 cm) from 4-6 sites along the crest of the moraines following the method of Briner (2009). Each suite of pebbles was crushed together, and quartz minerals were separated from the agglomeration of pebbles. Cosmogenic Ne-21 will be measured from these samples to determine their exposure age. From these two field sites, we will use He-3 and Ne-21 to better understand the timing and extent of glaciation in these areas.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85750", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85751" } }
{"authors":"Mac McKee::Utah State University--Alfonso Torres-Rua::Utah State University--Manal ELarab::Utah State University--Leila Hassan Esfahani::Utah State University--Austin Jensen::Utah State University--", "title":"NH43C-1905: Use of UAS to Support Management in Precision Agriculture: The AggieAir Experience", "abstract":"Remote sensing applications for precision agriculture depend on acquiring actionable information at high spatial resolution and at a temporal frequency appropriate for timely responses. Unmanned aerial systems (UAS) are capable of providing such imagery for use in various applications for precision agriculture (yield estimation, evapotranspiration, etc.). AggieAirTM, a UAS platform and sensory array, was designed and developed at Utah State University to acquire high-resolution imagery (0.15m -0.6 m) in the visual, near infrared, red edge, and thermal infrared spectra. Spectral data obtained from AggieAir are used to develop soil moisture, plant chlorophyll, leaf nitrogen and actual evapotranspiration estimates to support management in precision agriculture. This presentation will focus on experience in using the AggieAir system to provide information products of possible interest in precision agriculture. The discussion will include information about the direction and rate of development of UAS technology and the current and anticipated future state of the regulatory environment for use of these systems in the U.S.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85751", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85752" } }
{"authors":"Patrick Obrien::US Army Corps of Engineers--Hans Moritz::US Army Corps of Engineers--Kate White::US Army Corps of Engineers,--", "title":"PA42A-08: Framework for Vulnerability Assessment of Coastal Infrastructure", "abstract":"Coastal infrastructure can be highly vulnerable to changing climate, including increasing sea levels and altered frequency and intensity of coastal storms. Existing coastal infrastructure may be of a sufficient age that it is already experiencing noticeable impacts from global sea level rise, and require a variety of potential preparedness and resilience measures to adapt to changing climate. Methods to determine vulnerability to changing sea level and support planning of potential future adaptation measures are needed for application to projects having multiple purposes (e.g., navigation, coastal risk reduction). Here we describe a potential framework for assessing projects with several components typical of existing coastal infrastructure spanning a range of engineering disciplines (e.g., hydrology, geotechnical, structural, electrical, and mechanical). The US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) Climate Preparedness and Resilience Register (CPRR) framework is currently under development. It takes a tiered approach as described in earlier USACE guidance (Engineer Technical Letter 1100-2-1) using the three scenarios prescribed by Engineer Regulation ER 1100-2-8162 . Level 1 is a qualitative assessment defining the major sea level change-related impacts and ranks them in order of soonest occurrence. Level 2 is a quantitative evaluation that analyzes current and future performance of individual project components, including electrical, mechanical and structural components and functions using the sea level change scenarios prescribed by ER 1100-2-8162 . Level 3 proposes adaptation measures per ETL 1100-2-1 and evaluates changes in sea level change-related impacts.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85752", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85753" } }
{"authors":"Jose Cuevas::Scripps Institution of Oceanography--Elizabeth Sibert::University of California San Diego--Richard Norris::Scripps Institution of Oceanography--", "title":"PP33B-2313: Fish Productivity in Open-Ocean Gyre Systems in the Late Oligocene and Miocene", "abstract":"Understanding how marine ecosystems respond to climate change is very important as we continue to warm the climate. Fish represent a critical protein source for a significant portion of the global population, and as such, an understanding of fish production and its interactions with climate change may help better prepare for the future. Ichthyoliths, fossil fish teeth and shark scales, are a novel fossil group which can be used as an indicator for fish productivity. Several important climate events occurred during the Miocene (7 to 23 Ma), including the Middle Miocene Climatic Optimum. Here we reconstruct fish production from across the Miocene from Pacific and Atlantic Ocean gyres. South Atlantic samples, from Deep Sea Drilling Program (DSDP) Site 522 spanning from 30 to 20 Ma, show fairly variable numbers in the Oligocene (ranging from 100 to 800 ich/cm2/yr), but stabilization in the Early Miocene (around 400 ich/cm2/yr), suggesting that the beginning of the Miocene brought consistent conditions for fish production. In the North Pacific, our record from Ocean Drilling Program (ODP) Site 886 shows a distinct crash in fish productivity at 11 Ma, from 3500 ich/cm2/yr to a steady decline around 100 ich/cm2/yr for the next million years. This crash is followed by a marked increase in the presence of diatoms and biogenous opal. This is somewhat surprising, since in modern oceanic systems, an increase in diatoms and other large-celled phytoplankton is associated with shorter, more efficient food chains and higher levels of fish. It is also interesting to note that denticles remain consistently low at both sites, indicating consistently low shark populations through this time period. Together, these results suggest that the Late Oligocene and Miocene was a time of variable fish production and provide a window into understanding of dynamic ecosystem changes through the Miocene in open-ocean gyre ecosystems.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85753", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85754" } }
{"authors":"Edward Kempema::University of Wyoming--Alexis Mojica::Technological University of Panama--Guy Litt::University of Wyoming--Austin Carey::University of Wyoming--Fred Ogden::Univ. of Wyoming - Dept 3295--", "title":"H43B-1500: Effect of Forest Age on Rainwater Infiltration in the Lowland Humid Tropics", "abstract":"We are working in the headwaters of the Rio Agua Salud catchment in central Panama to test the hypothesis that varying land uses, including time since afforestation, have significant impacts on rainfall infiltration, runoff generation and groundwater recharge. Increased infiltration and groundwater recharge during the wet season may result in increased groundwater flow during the dry season, the “sponge effect hypothesis”. We irrigate a 6m by 2m test plot with slightly saline water at varying applied rainfall intensities using an ARS-type rainfall simulator, which has an oscillating boom mounted 2m above the forest floor, and four spray nozzles. We install 10cm tall lawn edging at the bottom of the test plot to direct surface water runoff to a small flume where runoff rates are recorded over time. In addition, we use time lapse ERI (electrical resistivity imaging) to map the vertical and downslope flow paths. We add NaCl to the applied water at a concentration of 200 mg/l, tagged with 10 mg/l LiBr as a salinity/conductivity contrast. Because ERI is highly sensitivity to changes in the electrical conductivity of soils and solute, we obtain a clear time-lapse image of flow path and bulk flow velocities. In this presentation we compare and contrast results of observations collected in an actively grazed cattle pasture adjacent ~10-12 year and >25 year old secondary forest plots using data collected during the 2015 wet season.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85754", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85755" } }
{"authors":"Dan Wynne::Organization Not Listed--Vincent Agusiegbe::CA Department Of Concervation--", "title":"NG12A-03: Hydraulic Fracturing of 403 Shallow Diatomite Wells in South Belridge Oil Field, Kern County, California, in 2014", "abstract":"We examine all 403 Hydraulic Fracture (HF) jobs performed by Aera Energy, LLC, in the South Belridge oil field, Kern County, CA in 2014. HFs in the South Belridge oil field are atypical amongst North American plays because the reservoir is shallow and produced via vertical wells. Our data set constitutes 88% of all HF jobs performed in CA oil fields in calendar-2014. The South Belridge field produces 11% of California’s oil and the shallow HFs performed here differ from most HFs performed elsewhere. We discuss fracture modeling and methods and summary statistics, and modelled dimensions of fractures and their relationships to depth and reservoir properties. The 403 HFs were made in the diatomite-dominated Reef Ridge member of the Monterey Formation. The HFs began at an average depth of 1047 feet below ground (ft TVD) and extended an average of 626 ft vertically downward. The deepest initiation of HF was at 2380 ft and the shallowest cessation was at 639 ft TVD. The average HF was performed using 1488 BBL (62,496 gallons) of water. The HFs were performed in no more than 6 stages and nearly all were completed within one day. We (1) compare metrics of the South Belridge sample group with recent, larger “all-CA” and nationwide samples; and (2) conclude that if relationships of reservoir properties, well completion and HF are well understood, shallow diatomite HF may be optimized to enhance production while minimizing environmental impact.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85755", "section":"Nonlinear Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85757" } }
{"authors":"Fernando Martinez-Torres::University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez--Alberto Lopez::University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez--", "title":"S51A-2660: Applying the Time-Domain Moment Tensor Inversion technique to Regional Earthquake Data in the Puerto Rico-Virgin Island Region", "abstract":"The quick determination of an earthquake’s moment tensor, whose description relate to centroid depth, faulting geometry and size, is crucial for tsunami warning systems. Whether an event possesses the critical parameters to produce a devastating tsunami, tsunami warning centers must knowThis research project seeks to test, well-formulated time-domain moment tensor inversion code in order to obtain in quasi real-time faulting parameters of significant regional earthquakes in the Puerto Rico-Virgin Islands region. The inversion code has been developed by researchers at the Berkeley Seismological Laboratory, whose main attractive is to decrease the time it takes to have an estimate calculation of a moment tensor for any major earthquake using regional data, approximately less than 7 minutes of an earthquake’s origin time. Four seismic events in the region have been used as testbed to the inversion code configured for this area. In order to compare our results, previously computed and published moment tensor inversions from the Global CMT and USGS for the same events were used to assess the deviations from results obtained in this study. Our results indicate the inversion method is capable of reproducing the regional and teleseismic solutions, and thus can be incorporated into daily earthquake location operations at the Puerto Rico Seismic Network (PRSN) for quick estimation of faulting mechanisms and tsunami warning purposes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85757", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85758" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"H11E-1397: LOG DISTRIBUTION, PERSISTENCE, AND GEOMORPHIC FUNCTION IN STREAMS AND RIVERS, IN THE NORTHEASTERN U.S.", "abstract":"Large wood provides critical ecosystem services such as fish habitat, temperature regulation and bank stabilization. In the northeastern U.S., the distribution of large wood is documented; however, there is little understanding of the movement, longevity and geomorphic function. This research examines the hypothesis that tree species control the persistence and geomorphic function of instream wood in the Appalachian region of the northeastern U.S. To do this, we assessed size, location, and species of logs in New Hampshire rivers, including locations in the White Mountain National Forest (WMNF) where these data were collected ten years ago. We expanded the previous dataset to include assessment of geomorphic function, including creation of diversion channels, pool formation, and sediment storage, among others. We also added new sites in the WMNF and sites on a large rural river in southwestern NH to increase the range of geomorphic variables to now include: confined and unconfined channels; 1st to 4th order streams; low to high gradient; meandering, multithreaded, and straight channels; and land use such as historic logging, modern agriculture, and post-agricultural abandonment. At each study site, we located all large logs (>10cm diameter, > 1m length) and log jams (>3 accumulated logs that provide a geomorphic function) along 100m-700m reaches. We marked each identified log with a numbered tag and recorded species, diameter, length, orientation, GPS location, tag number, and photographs. We assessed function and accumulation, decay, stability, and source classes for each log. Along each reach we measured riparian forest composition and structure and channel width. Preliminary analysis suggests that tree species significantly affects the function of logs: yellow birch and American sycamore are highly represented. Additionally, geomorphic setting also plays a primary role, where unconfined reaches have large logs that provide important functions; those functions are rarely contributed by logs in confined channels. Land use limit the ability of logs to provide habitat for vegetation recruitment, notable in rivers adjacent to agricultural areas that maintain a straight channel; invasive vegetation dominate the banks and there is little to no recruitment of native vegetation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85758", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85760" } }
{"authors":"Marco Velli::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"SH24A-02: The Slow and Fast Solar Wind: Understanding Heating, Acceleration and Turbulence from Observations with Solar Probe Plus and Solar Orbiter", "abstract":"The Solar Probe Plus and Solar Orbiter missions have as part of their goals to understand the coronal heating and source regions of the solar wind and the role of turbulence in the solar wind acceleration and dynamics. In this presentation a summary of the questions associated with the distibution of wind speeds and magnetic fields in the inner heliosphere and their origin on the sun will be summarized. Where and how does the sharp gradient in speeds develop close to the Sun? Is the wind source for fast and slow the same, and is there a steady component or is its origin always intermittent in nature? Where does the heliospheric current sheet form and how stable is it close to the Sun? Where does Alfv\'enic turbulence form and what is its role in coronal heating? I will describe how the multiple Solar Probe Plus passes together with Solar Orbiter alignments and quadratures will help to make fundamental progress on these questions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85760", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85763" } }
{"authors":"Seung Jun Oh::Space Environment Laboratory--", "title":"SA23C-2360: The role of TIDs in the creation of the electron density irregularities in the middle-latitude F region", "abstract":"The creation of the electron density irregularities in the middle latitude F region is often interpreted in association with traveling ionospheric disturbances (TIDs). However, the occurrence climatology of the irregularities is somewhat different from that of TIDs, and therefore, a different source of the irregularities may exist. In this study, we investigate the variability of the middle-latitude irregularities with local time, season, and solar cycle by analyzing the measurements of the ion density by the CHAMP (2001–2009) and Swarm (2014–2015) satellite observations. The occurrence climatology of the field-aligned irregularities (FAIs) in middle latitude is also investigated with the VHF radar observations acquired since January 2010 at Daejeon in South Korea. The role of TIDs in the creation of the middle latitude irregularities and FAIs is investigated by comparing the their occurrence climatology with the climatology of TIDs. The conventional wisdom is that the activity of TID decreases with an increase of the solar activity. However, our preliminary results show that the occurrence rate of the FAI increases with an increase of the solar activity. The distribution of the irregularities derived from the analysis of the satellite observations may provide insight into the relationship between TIDs, FAIs, and irregularities.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85763", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85764" } }
{"authors":"Raphael Viscarra Rossel::CSIRO Canberra--", "title":"B23G-0670: Mapping soil organic carbon content and composition across Australia to assess vulnerability to climate change", "abstract":"We can effectively monitor soil condition—and develop sound policies to offset the emissions of greenhouse gases—only with accurate data from which to define baselines. Currently, estimates of soil organic C for countries or continents are either unavailable or largely uncertain because they are derived from sparse data, with large gaps over many areas of the Earth. Here, we derive spatially explicit estimates, and their uncertainty, of the distribution and stock of organic C content and composition in the soil of Australia. The composition of soil organic C may be characterized by chemical separation or physical fractionation based on either particle size or particle density (Skjemstad et al., 2004; Gregorich et al., 2006; Kelleher&Simpson, 2006; Zimmermann et al., 2007). In Australia, for example, Skjemstad et al. (2004) used physical separation of soil samples into 50–2000 and <50-μm particle-size fractions followed by the measurement of char-carbon using solid-state 13C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, giving the three OC pools, particulate organic carbon (POC), humic organic carbon (HOC) and resistant organic carbon (ROC; charcoal or char-carbon). We assembled and harmonized data from several sources to produce the most comprehensive set of data on the current stock of organic C in soil of the continent. Using them, we have produced a fine spatial resolution baseline map of organic C, POC, HOC and ROC at the continental scale. In this presentation I will describe how we made the maps and how we use them to assess the vulnerability of soil organic C to for instance climate change.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85764", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85765" } }
{"authors":"Shane Grigsby::Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences--Sean Freeman::Colorado State University--Waleed Abdalati::University of Colorado at Boulder--", "title":"C44A-08: Facilitating comparisons between ICESat waveforms and ICESat-2 point data", "abstract":"A major challenge for ICESat-2 is how to make meaningful comparisons between the photon counting point data and legacy ICESat waveforms. Such comparisons are essential in quantifying changes in ice sheets across the last decade, but are complicated by the disparate data that is produced by the two instruments. These comparisons are especially important over complex surfaces such as crevasses, which are among the most dynamic ice sheet features and are often indicative of underlying changes in the ice stress fields. We use a density based algorithm (Ordering Points To Identify the Clustering Structure, or OPTICS) to filter photon counting data from two separate Photon-counting LiDAR instruments; the filtered point data is then weighted and convolved to simulate ICESat waveforms. Linking ICESat waveforms with ICESat-2 photon counts is needed in order to understand changes in ice sheet dynamics, and will help quantify the temporal scale of changes occurring in Greenland’s outlet glaciers.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85765", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85767" } }
{"authors":"Jani Radebaugh::Brigham Young University--Dario Ventra::Utrecht University--Ralph Lorenz::Applied Physics Laboratory Johns Hopkins--Tom Farr::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Randolph Kirk::USGS Grand Canyon Monitoring and Research Center--Alexander Hayes::Cornell University--Michael Malaska::Organization Not Listed--Sam Birch::Cornell University--Zac Yung-Chun Liu::Arizona State University--Jonathan Lunine::Cornell University--Jason Barnes::University of Idaho--Alice Le Gall::LATMOS Laboratoire Atmosphères, Milieux, Observations Spatiales--Rosaly Lopes::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Ellen Stofan::NASA Headquarters--Stephen Wall::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Philippe Paillou::University of Bordeaux 1--", "title":"P12B-01: Alluvial Fans on Titan Reveal Atmosphere and Surface Interactions and Material Transport", "abstract":"Alluvial fans, important depositional systems that record how sediment is stored and moved on planetary surfaces, are found on the surface of Titan, a body of significantly different materials and process rates than Earth. As seen by Cassini’s Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) images at 350 m resolution, fans on Titan are found globally and are variable in size, shape and relationship to adjacent landforms. Their morphologies and SAR characteristics, which reveal roughness, textural patterns and other material properties, show similarities with fans in Death Valley seen by SAR and indicate there are regions of high relative relief locally, in the Ganesa, Xanadu and equatorial mountain belt regions. The Leilah Fluctus fans near Ganesa are ~30 km x 15 km, similar to the largest Death Valley fans, and revealing mountainous topography adjacent to plains. Others have gentle slopes over hundreds of kilometers, as in the high southern latitude lakes regions or the Mezzoramia southern midlatitudes, where a fan system is 200 km x 150 km, similar to the Qarn Alam fan emerging into the Rub al Khali in Oman. Additionally, there is evidence for a range of particle sizes, from relatively coarse (~2 cm or more) to fine, revealing long-term duration and variability in erosion by methane rainfall and transport. Some features have morphologies consistent with proximality to high-relief source areas and highly ephemeral runoff, while others appear to draw larger catchment areas and are perhaps characterized by more prolonged episodes of flow. The presence of many fans indicates the longevity of rainfall and erosion in Titan’s surface processes and reveals that sediment transport and the precipitation that drives it are strongly episodic. Alluvial fans join rivers, lakes, eroded mountains, sand dunes and dissolution features in the list of surface morphologies derived from atmospheric and fluvial processes similar to those on Earth, strengthening comparisons between the two planetary bodies.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85767", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85768" } }
{"authors":"Erin Heffron::Center for Coastal & Ocean Mapping, School of Marine Science and Ocean Engineering, University of New Hampshire--Xavier Lurton::IFREMER--Geoffroy Lamarche::NIWA National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research--Craig Brown::Nova Scotia Community College--Vanessa Lucieer::University of Tasmania--Glen Rice::NOAA--Alexandre Schimel::Deakin University--Tom Weber::Center for Coastal & Ocean Mapping, School of Marine Science and Ocean Engineering/Joint Hydrographic Center, University of New Hampshire--", "title":"OS21A-1957: Multibeam Sonar Backscatter Data Acquisition and Processing: Guidelines and Recommendations from the GEOHAB Backscatter Working Group", "abstract":"Backscatter data acquired with multibeam sonars are now commonly used for the remote geological interpretation of the seabed. The systems hardware, software, and processing methods and tools have grown in numbers and improved over the years, yet many issues linger: there are no standard procedures for acquisition, poor or absent calibration, limited understanding and documentation of processing methods, etc. A workshop organized at the GeoHab (a community of geoscientists and biologists around the topic of marine habitat mapping) annual meeting in 2013 was dedicated to seafloor backscatter data from multibeam sonars and concluded that there was an overwhelming need for better coherence and agreement on the topics of acquisition, processing and interpretation of data. The GeoHab Backscatter Working Group (BSWG) was subsequently created with the purpose of documenting and synthetizing the state-of-the-art in sensors and techniques available today and proposing methods for best practice in the acquisition and processing of backscatter data. Two years later, the resulting document ` Backscatter measurements by seafloor-mapping sonars: Guidelines and Recommendations`  was completed1. The document provides: An introduction to backscatter measurements by seafloor-mapping sonars; A background on the physical principles of sonar backscatter; A discussion on users’ needs from a wide spectrum of community end-users; A review on backscatter measurement; An analysis of best practices in data acquisition; A review of data processing principles with details on present software implementation; and finally A synthesis and key recommendations. This presentation reviews the BSWG mandate, structure, and development of this document. It details the various chapter contents, its recommendations to sonar manufacturers, operators, data processing software developers and end-users and its implication for the marine geology community. 1: Downloadable at https://www.niwa.co.nz/coasts-and-oceans/research-projects/backscatter-measurement-guidelines", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85768", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85769" } }
{"authors":"Peng Kang-Ming::NCKU National Cheng Kung University--Rue-Ron Hsu::National Cheng Kung University--Han-Tzong Su::National Cheng Kung University--Alfred Chen::National Cheng Kung University National Penghu University--Jung-Kuang Chou::National Cheng Kung University--Shu-Chun Chang::NCKU National Cheng Kung University--Yen-Jung Wu::NCKU National Cheng Kung University--Hung Chien-Lun::National Penghu University--I-Ching Yang::National Taitung University--Sung-Hui Tsai::Kinmen Jin-Cheng Junior High School--", "title":"AE33C-0511: Triangulation of the Gigantic Jets in 20 August 2014", "abstract":"Coordinate optical observation campaigns on TLEs near Taiwan are held since 2011 with the aim to triangulate TLEs. Currently, there are four stations with baseline varying from 100 to 400 km between them. Our optical observation systems recorded 48 various types of TLEs on the night of 20 August 2014, with eight of them being gigantic jets that were recorded by at least two stations. Due to the length of baselines and the TLE occurring locations, the earth curvature needed to be taken into account by means of spherical trigonometry method. The preliminary results shows the gigantic jets occurred over the northern Taiwan and the accuracy of geolocation is less than 1 km and the accuracy of the retrieval height on the key structures is less than 0.5 km. The triangulation results of the eight events indicate most of these gigantic jets terminated at 80-90km, but one of the gigantic jets is likely extend to 100 km. Three of the eight gigantic jets occurred consequently after previous one with time interval of 500ms to more than 100s. The previous gigantic jet is likely to influence the consequent gigantic jet for usually the consequent gigantic jet has more beads structures in high altitude and one of the streamer column of a consequent gigantic jets at 55 -60 km is identified to re-bright, which is more than 100s after the previous gigantic jet.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85769", "section":"Atmospheric and Space Electricity"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85770" } }
{"authors":"Welivitiyage Don Dimuth Welivitiya::University of Newcastle--Garry Willgoose::University of Newcastle--Greg Hancock::University of Newcastle--Sagy Cohen::University of Alabama--", "title":"EP31B-1008: Coupling Landform Evolution and Soil Pedogenesis – Initial Results From the SSSPAM5D Model", "abstract":"Evolution of soil on a dynamic landform is a crucial next step in landscape evolution modelling. Some attempts have been taken such as MILESD by Vanwalleghem et al. to develop a first model which is capable of simultaneously evolving both the soil profile and the landform. In previous work we have presented physically based models for soil pedogenesis, mARM and SSSPAM. In this study we present the results of coupling a landform evolution model with our SSSPAM5D soil pedogenesis model. In previous work the SSSPAM5D soil evolution model was used to identify trends of the soil profile evolution on a static landform. Two pedogenetic processes, namely (1) armouring due to erosion, and (2) physical and chemical weathering were used in those simulations to evolve the soil profile. By incorporating elevation changes (due to erosion and deposition) we have advanced the SSSPAM5D modelling framework into the realm of landscape evolution. Simulations have been run using elevation and soil grading data of the engineered landform (spoil heap) at the Ranger Uranium Mine, Northern Territory, Australia. The results obtained for the coupled landform-soil evolution simulations predict the erosion of high slope areas, development of rudimentary channel networks in the landform and deposition of sediments in lowland areas, and qualitatively consistent with landform evolution models on their own. Examination of the soil profile characteristics revealed that hill crests are weathering dominated and tend to develop a thick soil layer. The steeper hillslopes at the edge of the landform are erosion dominated with shallow soils while the foot slopes are deposition dominated with thick soil layers. The simulation results of our coupled landform and soil evolution model provide qualitatively correct and timely characterization of the soil evolution on a dynamic landscape. Finally we will compare the characteristics of erosion and deposition predicted by the coupled landform-soil SSSPAM landscape simulator, with landform evolution simulations using a static soil.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85770", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85771" } }
{"authors":"Marc Simard::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Temilola Fatoyinbo::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Victor Rivera-Monroy::Louisiana State University, School of the Coast and the Enivronment--Edward Castaneda::Louisiana State University, School of the Coast and the Enivronment--Rinku Roy Chowdhury::Clark University--", "title":"B51I-07: Global trends and vulnerabilities of mangrove forests", "abstract":"Mangrove forests are located along Earth’s coastlines and estuaries within tropical and subtropical latitudes. They provide numerous services functioning as an extraordinary carbon sequestration system and serving as habitat and nursery for fish, crustaceans and amphibians. To coastal populations, they provide livelihood, food, lumber and act as an effective protection against tsunamis, storm surges and hurricanes. Their vulnerability to sea level rise is strongly related to their extraordinary ability to accumulate soils, which is in part related to their productivity and therefore canopy structure. As a first step to understand their vulnerability, we seek to understand mangrove dependencies on environmental and geophysical setting. To achieve this, we mapped mangrove canopy height and above ground biomass (AGB) at the Global scale. To identify mangrove forests, existing maps derived from a collection of Landsat data around the 2000 era were used. Using the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission elevation data collected in February of 2000, we produced a Global map of mangrove canopy height. The estimated heights were validated with the ICESat/Geoscience Altimeter System (GLAS) and in situ field data. Most importantly, field data were also used to derive relationships between canopy height and AGB. While the geographical coverage of in situ data is limited, ICESat/GLAS data provided extensive geographical coverage with independent estimates of maximum canopy height. These estimates were used to calibrate SRTM-estimates of height at the Global scale. We found the difference between GLAS RH100 and SRTM resulted from several sources of uncertainty that are difficult to isolate. These include natural variations of canopy structure with time, system errors from GLAS and SRTM, geo-location errors and discrepancies in spatial resolution. The Global canopy height map was trnasormed into AGB using the field-derived allometry. Depending on the scale of analysis and geographical location, accuracies in the order 2 to 4m in height was obtained with AGB accuracies below 20%.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85771", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85772" } }
{"authors":"Erick Wright::University of Texas at Austin--Christopher Landry::University of Texas at Austin--Peter Eichhubl::University of Texas at Austin--", "title":"MR41B-2641: Potentially Conductive Channels in Fracture Cements of Low Permeability Rocks", "abstract":"Natural fractures in shale reservoirs are frequently filled with mineral cement that lacks any residual fracture porosity that is visible under the petrographic microscope. These fully cemented fractures are generally interpreted to be impermeable for fluid flow. Scanning electron microscopy of calcite, dolomite, and barite fracture cements from a variety of shale reservoirs, prepared using broad ion beam milling, provides evidence of open to partially healed elongate pores that are on the order of hundreds of nanometers in aperture. In calcite fracture cement, these pores have consistent apertures of about 100 nm. In dolomite and barite, apertures are up to 500 nm. These pores have been previously overlooked because traditional thin sectioning and polishing destroys sub-micron details of the fracture cement pore structure. Ion milling preserves these details with a minimum of sample damage during sample preparation. Electron backscatter diffraction shows that these pores occur along grain boundaries within the blocky or columnar fracture cement. While partially healed, these pores, arranged along grain boundaries, are frequently sufficiently well connected acting as channels for fluid flow along and across fully cemented natural fractures. In shale reservoirs of ultra-low matrix permeability, these grain boundary channels may thus provide fracture permeability significantly contributing to reservoir production where intersected or indirectly reactivated by hydraulic fractures.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85772", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85773" } }
{"authors":"Gabriel Wolken::Alaska Division of Geological and Geophysical Surveys--Erin Whorton::Alaska Division of Geological and Geophysical Surveys--", "title":"C33G-05: Photogrammetrically derived estimates of end-of-winter snow depth variability in complex terrain", "abstract":"Seasonal snow is a key cryospheric variable because of its influence on energy and water budgets, public safety, and regional economies. Quantitative information on the spatial distribution of snow depth and snow water equivalence (SWE) is central to numerous applications in cryospheric research. However, in complex terrain, strong orographic gradients and wind redistribution produce complicated accumulation patterns that are difficult to capture using traditional in situ and satellite-based approaches, and are challenging to model with acceptable levels of uncertainty. Here we apply a repeat airborne photogrammetric approach and employ a Structure from Motion (SfM) processing method to generate digital surface models (DSMs) of snow-free and end-of-winter snow covered surfaces. Surface elevation differencing of these datasets produces a continuous and accurate snow depth map into which we assimilate in situ SWE measurements to produce detailed estimates of SWE over complex terrain in the maritime-continental transition zone of the eastern Chugach Mountains.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85773", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85774" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"NH13C-1950: Global Hydrological Hazard Evaluation System (Global BTOP) Using Distributed Hydrological Model", "abstract":"A global hydrological hazard evaluation system based on the BTOP models (Global BTOP) is introduced and quantifies flood and drought hazards with simulated river discharges globally for historical, near real-time monitoring and climate change impact studies. The BTOP model utilizes a modified topographic index concept and simulates rainfall-runoff processes including snowmelt, overland flow, soil moisture in the root and unsaturated zones, sub-surface flow, and river flow routing. The current global BTOP is constructed from global data on 10-min grid and is available to conduct river basin analysis on local, regional, and global scale. To reduce the impact of a coarse resolution, topographical features of global BTOP were obtained using river network upscaling algorithm that preserves fine resolution characteristics of 3-arcsec HydroSHEDS and 30-arcsec Hydro1K datasets. In addition, GLCC-IGBP land cover (USGS) and the DSMW(FAO) were used for the root zone depth and soil properties, respectively. The long-term seasonal potential evapotranspiration within BTOP model was estimated by the Shuttleworth-Wallace model using climate forcing data CRU TS3.1 and a GIMMS-NDVI(UMD/GLCF). The global BTOP was run with globally available precipitation such APHRODITE dataset and showed a good statistical performance compared to the global and local river discharge data in the major river basins. From these simulated daily river discharges at each grid, the flood peak discharges of selected return periods were obtained using the Gumbel distribution with L-moments and the hydrological drought hazard was quantified using standardized runoff index (SRI). For the dynamic (near real-time) applications, the global BTOP model is run with GSMaP-NRT global precipitation and simulated daily river discharges are utilized in a prototype near-real time discharge simulation system (GFAS-Streamflow), which is used to issue flood peak discharge alerts globally. The global BTOP system and GFAS-Streamflow sites may be used to introduce a combined flood and drought hazard monitor to close the gap between local and global scale hazard assessments and support the International Flood Initiative (IFI) Flagship Project, which aims to support benchmarking flood risk reduction at global, national and local levels.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85774", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85775" } }
{"authors":"Sachiko Yoshida::Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution--Alison Macdonald::Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution--Steven Jayne::Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution--Irina Rypina::WHOI--Ken O Buesseler::Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution--", "title":"OS31A-1972: Observed Eastward Progression of the Fukushima 134Cs Signal Across the North Pacific", "abstract":"Radionuclide samples taken as part of hydrographic surveys at 30°N in the North Pacific reveal that the easternmost edge of Fukushima-derived 134Cs observed at 174.3°W in 2012 had progressed eastward across the basin to 160.6°W by 2013. The 2013 30°N observations indicate surface 134Cs concentrations of 3–5 Bq/m3 between 160°E and 160°W, slightly lower concentrations west of 160°E and no detectable signal east of 160.6°W. Profile samples show 134Cs penetration to 500 m west of 180° with shoaling penetration depth toward to the east. The near-uniform vertical distribution of 137Cs between 152°W and 121.3°W in the top 500 m is indicative of trace amounts of radionuclides remaining from weapons testing. The physical processes responsible for the deep 134Cs penetration in the western Pacific appear to be related to distinct water mass subduction pathways, however the timing and rapidity of deep penetration over the broad scales observed has yet to be clarified.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85775", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85776" } }
{"authors":"Yang Lv::RADI Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Donghui Li::RADI Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Zhengqiang Li::Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China--Xingfeng Chen::RADI Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Hua Xu::RADI Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Zhao Liu::RADI Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Lili Qie::RADI Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Ying Zhang::State Environmental Protection Key Laboratory of Satellites Remote Sensing Applications--Kaitao Li::RADI Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Yan Ma::RADI Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences--", "title":"A51B-0044: Observation of a Dust Storm during 2015 Spring over Beijing, China", "abstract":"Dust events bring significant impacts on the regional environment, human health and even climate. There are four major dust explosion areas in the world, such as North America, Australia, Central Asia and Middle East. Located in the Central Asia, North China has a severe desertification because of deforestation and excessive population growth. Beijing is at the fork of three dust transmission paths in Chin, which makes it a dust-prone region for a long history especially in spring. Thanks to the improvement of the ecological environment in Mongolia, the number of dust weather in recent years reduced significantly than before. However, as the spring coming earlier for the relatively high temperature, a severe dust weather process happened suddenly on March 28, 2015 following with the long-term hazy weather, which up to the highest intensity in the nearly two years. A set of ground-based observations for this serious dust event were adopted in this paper. The ground-based remote sensing station is equipped with an automatic CIMEL lidar and an AERONET sun-photometer. Aerosol optical depth (AOD) and aerosol size distribution were measured by sun-photometer. AOD of dust reached 2.0 at 532nm, which was much larger than clear days. And there was an obvious trend that coarse mode increases more significantly and quickly than fine mode when a dust storm occurs. At the same time, data provided by the air quality monitoring and analysis platform of China shown that the PM10 concentration was larger than 1000μg/m3 and PM10 made important contribution to the high AQI. Lidar observation clearly shown the dust spread very tall (higher than 1km) when the dust storm occurrence. After the dust dissipating, the planetary boundary layer roughly from 0 to 3km, aerosol has a very widely vertical distribution. The AOD based on sun-photometer were taken as a constraint, 65 sr were retrieved and analyzed. And the extinction coefficients indicated that the dust had been dissipation near the ground, while some dissolved into the upper air (2-3km) after the dust passed over. Backward trajectory analysis showed those dust was originating from Mongolia (northwest of Beijing). According to the air quality index data, the dust transmission path could be Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei-Shandong-Jiangsu. And then it deposited at Taizhou in Jiangsu province.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85776", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85777" } }
{"authors":"Dulce Vargas-Bracamontes::University of Colima--F Nava Pichardo::Centro de Investigación Científica y de Educación Superior de Ensenada (CICESE)--Gabriel Reyes Dávila::University of Colima--Raúl Arámbula Mendoza::University of Colima--Alejandro Martínez Fierros::University of Colima--Ariel Ramírez Vázquez::University of Colima--Miguel González Amezcua::University of Colima--", "title":"V23A-3076: Seismic time-frequency analysis of the recent 2015 eruptive activity of Volcán de Colima, Mexico", "abstract":"Volcán de Colima is an andesitic stratovolcano located in western Mexico. It is considered the most active volcano in Mexico, with activity characterized mainly by intermittent effusive and explosive episodes. On July 10th-12th 2015, Volcán de Colima underwent its most intense eruptive phase since its Plinian eruption in 1913. A partial collapse of the dome and of the crater wall generated several pyroclastic flows, the largest of which reached almost 10 km to the south of the volcano. Lava flows along with incandescent rockfalls descended through various flanks of the volcanic edifice. Ashfall affected people up to 40 km from the volcano’s summit. Inhabitants from the small villages closest to the volcano were evacuated and authorities sealed off a 12 km area. We present an overview of the seismic activity that preceded and accompanied this eruptive phase, with data from the closest broadband and short period seismic stations of the Volcán de Colima monitoring network. We focus on the search of temporal information within the spectral content of the seismic signals. We first employ common time-frequency representations such as Fourier and wavelet transforms, but we also apply more recent techniques proposed for the analysis of non-stationary signals, such as empirical mode decomposition and the synchrosqueezing transform. We present and discuss the performances of these various methods characterizing and quantifying spectral changes which could be used to forecast future eruptive events and to evaluate the course of volcanic processes during ongoing eruptions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85777", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85778" } }
{"authors":"Katherine Bosman::ESG Solutions--Gisela Viegas::ESG Solutions--Adam Baig::Engineering Seismology Group Canada Inc--Ted Urbancic::Engineering Seismology Group Canada Inc--", "title":"T43D-3049: Source Characterization and Seismic Hazard Considerations for Hydraulic Fracture Induced Seismicity", "abstract":"Large microseismic events (M>0) have been shown to be generated during hydraulic fracture treatments relatively frequently. These events are a concern both from public safety and engineering viewpoints. Recent microseismic monitoring projects in the Horn River Basin have utilized both downhole and surface sensors to record events associated with hydraulic fracturing. The resulting hybrid monitoring system has produced a large dataset with two distinct groups of events: large events recorded by the surface network (0<M<3), and small events recorded only by the downhole sensors (-4<M<0). Large events tend to occur well below the reservoir on pre-existing structures; small events are concentrated at reservoir depth. Differences in behavior have been observed between these two datasets, leading to conclusions of different underlying processes responsible for the recorded activity. Both datasets show very low seismic efficiency, implying slip weakening and possibly the presence of fluids in the source region. Reservoir events have shear-tensile source mechanisms ranging between tensile opening and tensile closing, and fracture orientations dominated by the rock fabric which are not always optimally oriented to the regional stress field. The observed source characteristics are expected for events driven by increased pore pressure and reduced friction due to lubrication. On average, deep events show higher stress drop, apparent stress, and rupture velocity than reservoir events. This reflects higher confining stresses with depth, and possibly the release of stored energy in the existing zone of weakness. Deep events are dominated by shear failures, but source characteristics are smaller than for naturally occurring tectonic earthquakes of similar magnitude. Most importantly from a seismic hazard perspective, large earthquakes associated with hydrofracing have lower stress drops than tectonic earthquakes, and thus produce smaller peak ground acceleration and less damage on surface. The largest event recorded in this dataset has a moment magnitude of +2.9 and was felt by field crews in the area. The response spectrum for this event has maximum ground acceleration less than 20% of the UBC-97 Type I design response spectrum, and thus does not pose a significant threat to infrastructure.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85778", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85779" } }
{"authors":"Zhong-Hai Li::Chinese Academy of Geological Sciences--Mian Liu::University of Missouri Columbia--Taras Gerya::ETH Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich--", "title":"T21E-2904: Lithosphere delamination and topography evolution in collisional orogens", "abstract":"Systematic high-resolution thermo-mechanical numerical models are conducted in order to better understand the behavior of deep mantle lithosphere and surface topography response during continental collision. In the models with similar rheological properties for the pro- (subducting) and retro- (overriding) continental plates, subduction mode is preferred, with localized topography uplift and mountain building. However, if the effective viscosities of the retro-plate are decreased, then delamination of the lithospheric mantle may occur there, which results in large-scale topography buildup and plateau formation. Several other factors that may also influence the delamination dynamics are further investigated, e.g., plastic weakening of the lithospheric mantle, density contrast between the lithospheric and asthenospheric mantle, convergence velocity, as well as the possible lower crust eclogitization effects. Based on the series of numerical simulations, the delamination processes in collisional orogens are summarized into three modes: (1) pro-plate delamination, (2) retro-plate delamination, and (3) a transitional double-plates (both the pro- and retro-plate) delamination. The controlling factors, as well as the geological applications in nature, of the variable delamination modes are also discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85779", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85780" } }
{"authors":"Jay Thomas::Syracuse University--", "title":"T51I-07: Geochemistry of recrystallized rocks", "abstract":"Experiments were conducted to evaluate mechanisms operating along grain boundaries that control compositional and textural properties during recrystallization of rocks. Grain boundaries act as important geochemical reservoirs because elements that are incompatible in the dominant matrix minerals of a rock are partitioned into grain boundaries. Compositional variations in recrystallized minerals adjacent to grain boundaries in recrystallized rocks result from processes that are similar to those that modify compositions in mineral/melt and mineral/fluid systems. In fluid-free systems the transport of elements in polycrystalline materials must occur by diffusion along pathways composed of grain boundaries. From a purely geometrical standpoint, the only available pathway for coexisting minerals to ‘communicate’ with one another in response to changes in P–T is by grain-boundary diffusion. Because grain-boundary diffusion is commonly 104 to 106 times higher than diffusion through the lattices of most rock forming minerals, rapid transport of components through low volume grain boundaries may govern the kinetics of textural and geochemical equilibration. Minerals adjacent to grain boundaries may incorporate elements from the grain boundary region. The extent to which minerals adjacent to grain boundaries equilibrate is largely dependent upon the mechanism by which those minerals incorporate impurities from the grain-boundary region; lattice diffusion from a grain-boundary source may produce limited equilibration whereas chemically induced grain-boundary migration may produce extensive equilibration. The presence of a free fluid phase significantly affects the transport along grain boundaries, and in many cases will promote equilibration through dissolution and precipitation of minerals adjacent to grain boundaries.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85780", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85782" } }
{"authors":"Katsumasa Tanaka::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Yoshiki Yamagata::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Tokuta Yokohata::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Seita Emori::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--Tatsuya Hanaoka::NIES National Institute of Environmental Studies--", "title":"B23G-0673: Can we bet on negative emissions to achieve the 2°C target even under strong carbon cycle feedbacks?", "abstract":"Negative emission technologies such as Bioenergy with Carbon dioxide Capture and Storage (BioCCS) play an ever more crucial role in meeting the 2°C stabilization target. However, such technologies are currently at their infancy and their future penetrations may fall short of the scale required to stabilize the warming. Furthermore, the overshoot in the mid-century prior to a full realization of negative emissions would give rise to a risk because such a temporal but excessive warming above 2°C might amplify itself by strengthening climate-carbon cycle feedbacks. It has not been extensively assessed yet how carbon cycle feedbacks might play out during the overshoot in the context of negative emissions.   This study explores how 2°C stabilization pathways, in particular those which undergo overshoot, can be influenced by carbon cycle feedbacks and asks their climatic and economic consequences. We compute 2°C stabilization emissions scenarios under a cost-effectiveness principle, in which the total abatement costs are minimized such that the global warming is capped at 2°C. We employ a reduced-complexity model, the Aggregated Carbon Cycle, Atmospheric Chemistry, and Climate model (ACC2), which comprises a box model of the global carbon cycle, simple parameterizations of the atmospheric chemistry, and a land-ocean energy balance model. The total abatement costs are estimated from the marginal abatement cost functions for CO2, CH4, N2O, and BC.  Our preliminary results show that, if carbon cycle feedbacks turn out to be stronger than what is known today, it would incur substantial abatement costs to keep up with the 2°C stabilization goal. Our results also suggest that it would be less expensive in the long run to plan for a 2°C stabilization pathway by considering strong carbon cycle feedbacks because it would cost more if we correct the emission pathway in the mid-century to adjust for unexpectedly large carbon cycle feedbacks during overshoot. Furthermore, our tentative results point to a key policy message: do not rely on negative emissions to achieve the 2°C target. It would make more sense to gear climate mitigation actions toward the stabilization target without betting on negative emissions because negative emissions might create large overshoot in case of strong feedbacks.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85782", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85783" } }
{"authors":"Li-Jen Chen::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Michael Hesse::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Shan Wang::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Craig Pollock::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Roy Torbert::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Daniel Gershman::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--John Dorelli::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Barbara Giles::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Naoki Bessho::University of Maryland College Park--William Daughton::Los Alamos National Laboratory--James Burch::Southwest Research Institute--", "title":"SM43A-06: Mapping Out the Diffusion Region in Magnetopause Reconnection: from CLUSTER to Magnetospheric Multiscale", "abstract":"The ion and electron diffusion regions in magnetopause reconnection are mapped out with distinct plasma distribution functions and field structures using data from the Magnetospheric Multiscale (MMS) and CLUSTER missions as well as particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations. The four-point measurements from CLUSTER provide in part the reality check for the simulation predictions concerning the ion diffusion region, including electron distribution maps for the inflow, separatrix, and exhaust, the plasma flow patterns, and the electric and magnetic field structures. A number of candidate electron diffusion region (EDR) crossings by CLUSTER have been identified based on combined field reversals, density gradients, and jet reversals. Surrounding the candidate EDR are regions of accelerated and heated plasmas with anisotropic distribution functions that often consist of multiple components. However, the highly structured electron distribution functions characteristic of the EDR predicted by PIC remain elusive. The unprecedented high-cadence three-dimensional measurements from the Fast Plasma Investigation and the FIELDS suite onboard the four MMS spacecraft open up the possibilities to resolve the EDR. We will demonstrate how MMS measurements push forward the frontier of our understanding on the diffusion region physics in magnetopause reconnection.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85783", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85786" } }
{"authors":"Andrew Bliss::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Regine Hock::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Gabriel Wolken::Alaska Division of Geological and Geophysical Surveys--Erin Whorton::Alaska Division of Geological and Geophysical Surveys--Jing Zhang::NC A&T State University--Alessio Gusmeroli::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Juliana Braun::University of Alaska, Fairbanks--Anna Liljedahl::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Jörg Schulla::Self Employed--", "title":"C32C-06: Changes to Glacier Runoff and Downstream Effects on the Susitna Basin, Alaska Over the Twenty-First Century", "abstract":"Runoff from glaciers in the upper Susitna Basin, Alaska will change as the climate changes over the next century. The quantity and seasonality of river flow in the 13,289 km^2 basin depends on glacier runoff to an extent that belies the small percentage of the basin's area that is covered by glaciers (4%). We run a physically-based hydrological model (WaSiM) to project 21st century river discharge for the basin, explicitly including the glacier component of runoff. Climate inputs come from a CCSM CMIP5 RCP6.0 scenario downscaled to a 20km-5km nested grid using the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) Model and are adjusted with a local bias correction. From 2010-2029 to 2080-2099 the basin-wide mean-annual temperature will rise 2.5 degrees and total precipitation will rise 2%, with a 13% decrease in snowfall and a 20% increase in rainfall. WaSiM runs indicate that glaciers will lose about 40% of their area, evapotranspiration will increase, and permafrost will thaw. Annual runoff will remain relatively steady, but the timing of the peak spring runoff will shift to an earlier date (by about 1 month) and late summer runoff will be reduced (by about 50%) compared to present. ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85786", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85787" } }
{"authors":"Masayuki Hyodo::Yamaguchi University--", "title":"B12B-05: Mechanical and dissociation properties of methane hydrate bearing sands with various fines", "abstract":"A high pressure and low temperature plane strain testing apparatus was also developed for visualizing the deformation of methane hydrate (MH) bearing sand due to methane hydrate production . This apparatus can control temperatures and pressures equivalent to an MH reservoir in deep seabed. Additionally, observation windows are installed in front of and behind the specimen in order to allow the local deformation of the specimen during shear tests to be measured. The specimen is a cuboid with 80mm width, 60mm thickness and 160mm height. A 5mmｘ5mm mesh was drawn on the membrane in front of the observation window. Using this testing apparatus, plane strain compression and methane hydrate dissociation by depressurization tests were performed with the measurement of localized deformation. Local deformation analysis was performed by observing the cross-points of the mesh during shear tests and using this data in PIV analysis. Thermocouples were installed at 60mm and 30mm from the bottom of the specimen in order to measure the variation of the temperature during the dissociation of MH. Tc and Toyoura sand were the materials used for comparison. In plane strain shear tests, Tc and Toyoura sand as host sands with and without MH were compared. Due to the existence of MH, initial stiffness and strength increased in both materials, however the tendency was more apparent in Toyoura sand compared with Tc. The local deformations occurred more clearly in Toyoura sand, compared with fine material. It also appeared more clearly when the specimen contained MH. During depressurization, marked deformation was not observed, because of an increase of effective stress. However, after depressurization, repressurization caused the specimen to fail in the case of high initial shear stress conditions. ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85787", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85788" } }
{"authors":"Mohammad Jafar Soltanjalili::The University of Newcastle--Patricia Saco::The University of Newcastle--Garry Willgoose::The University of Newcastle--", "title":"H13B-1515: The Ecohydrologic Role of Coexistence and Competition in Semiarid Hillslopes", "abstract":"Through its influence on runoff and erosion-deposition processes, vegetation remarkably regulates different aspects of landscape dynamics. Here, the influence of different plant functional traits on the coexistence of different species in arid and semi-arid regions with patchy vegetation is investigated using an ecohydrology model. The model simulates coevolving changes in biomass patterns for two species, as well as overland flow and soil moisture dynamics. Vegetation patterns emerge as a result of facilitation (shading and infiltration) and competition mechanisms as well as varying seed dispersal strategies. The results show that the survival of only one species or the coexistence of both species not only strongly depends on environmental stresses, but also on differences in hillslope micro and macro topography. These vegetation patterns have very different hydrologic signatures and the potential to trigger remarkably different geomorphic responses. Based on these results we establish new hypothesis that will be used to further investigate the role of plant interspecific and intraspecific feedbacks on landscape coevolution processes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85788", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85789" } }
{"authors":"Allen Hunt::Wright State University Main Campus--Behzad Ghanbarian::University of Texas at Austin--", "title":"H43G-1618: Scaling relationships for soil formation and edaphic controls on vegetation growth", "abstract":"Critical path analysis (CPA) is suited to calculating the hydraulic conductivity, K, of heterogeneous porous media by quantifying of paths of least resistance. Whenever CPA could be used to calculate K, advective transport scaling relationships from percolation theory should describe solute transport. Two solute transport relationships are applied to predict soil development and edaphic constraints on natural vegetation growth. These results use known exponents from percolation theory and known subsurface flow velocities. The typical flow velocity itself constrains optimal growth rates of cultivars. The percolation scaling relationship constraining vegetation growth is shown to be in accord with data over time scales from hours to 100,000 years, including over a dozen studies (and two models) of tree growth. The scaling function for soil development explains time scales for formation of soils from years to hundreds of millions of years. Data on soil development comes from 23 different studies. The key unification is the common origin of the time and space coordinates for all three relationships in the time of transport through a single pore of roughly micron size at a typical subsurface pore-scale flow velocity. The distinction in evolving time scales is primarily a result of the hierarchical nature of vascular plant root systems, which speed up nutrient access relative to physical transport rates in the soil. The results help explain reduction in forest productivity with age, diminishing soil production with time, and the temporal distinction between the relevance of chemical and biological processes in soils to the global carbon cycle.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85789", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85790" } }
{"authors":"Andrew Nieblas::San Francisco State University--Mary Leech::San Francisco State University--", "title":"T21C-2842: P-T-t-d History of the Lahul Valley, NW Indian Himalaya", "abstract":"The Lahul Valley of NW India is located between the Zanskar Shear zone to the northwest and the Sangla detachment to the southeast. This region contains three east-trending, laterally-continuous tectonostratigraphic units separated by two major fault zones. To the south, low-grade metasediments of the Lesser Himalayan Sequence (LHS) are separated from high-grade crystalline rocks of the Greater Himalayan Sequence (GHS) by the north dipping Main Central Thrust (MCT). The northern extent of the GHS is separated from overlying low-grade sedimentary rocks of the Tethyan Himalayan Sequence (THS) along the north dipping South Tibetan Detachment System (STDS). There is controversy over the location and type of shear motion for the STDS in the ~50 km strip running through Lahul Valley where the STD is interpreted as a discrete fault, a dextral shear zone, and is unidentified in some areas along the trend of the STDS. This study focuses on understanding the pressure-temperature-time-deformation (P-T-t-d) evolution of THS and GHS rocks in Lahul Valley to better understand regional Cenozoic deformation and the location and role of the STDS in the extrusion of the GHS. Deformed granitics, migmatites, and leucogranites from the GHS contain a dominant mineralogy of Qz + Kfs + Pl + Bt + Ms ± Grt ± Ky ± St. Schists and phyllites from the THS contain a dominant mineralogy of Qz + Kfs + Pl + Bt + Ms ± Grt. Isochemical phase equilibria diagrams (pseudosections) are calculated in Perple_X using whole-rock chemistry data with solution models based on these mineral assemblages. Ti-in-quartz thermometry and the Fe-Mg exchange thermometry from garnet-biotite pairs used with mineral growth relationships constrain conditions during deformation and to establish P-T paths. U-Pb SHRIMP dating of zircon constrains peak metamorphic conditions and 40Ar/39Ar thermochronology of micas provide the cooling history along the valley and across the STDS. This multi-component approach to understand the metamorphic and deformational evolution of Lahul provides a holistic understanding of the GHS, THS, and STDS in a controversial area that can be used to draw comparisons, and build on tectonic models in the NW Himalaya.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85790", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85791" } }
{"authors":"John Lovette::University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill--Jonathan Duncan::University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill--Solomon Vimal::UNESCO-IHE� Institute for Water Education--Lawrence Band::University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill--", "title":"H43C-1522: Channel Geometry and Flood Flows: Quantifying over-bank flow dynamics during high-flow events in North Carolina’s floodplains", "abstract":"Natural riparian areas play numerous roles in the maintenance and improvement of stream water quality. Both restoration of riparian areas and improvement of hydrologic connectivity to the stream are often key goals of river restoration projects. These management actions are designed to improve nutrient removal by slowing and treating overland flow delivered from uplands and by storing, treating, and slowly releasing streamwater from overbank inundation during flood events. A major question is how effective this storage of overbank flow is at treating streamwater based on the cumulative time stream discharge at a downstream location has spent in shallower, slower overbank flow. The North Carolina Floodplain Mapping Program maintains a detailed statewide Flood Risk Information System (FRIS) using HEC-RAS modeling, lidar, and detailed surveyed river cross-sections. FRIS provides extensive information regarding channel geometry on approximately 39,000 stream reaches (a slightly coarser spatial resolution than the NHD+v2 dataset) with tens of cross-sections for each reach. We use this FRIS data to calculate volume and discharge from floodplain riparian areas separately from in-channel flow during overbank events. Preliminary results suggest that a small percentage of total annual discharge interacts with the full floodplain extent along a stream reach due to the infrequency of overbank flow events. However, with the significantly different physical characteristics of the riparian area when compared to the channel itself, this overbank flow can provide unique services to water quality. Our project aims to use this information in conjunction with data from the USGS SPARROW program to target non-point source hotspots of Nitrogen and Phosphorus addition and removal. By better understanding the flow dynamics within riparian areas during high flow events, riparian restoration projects can be carried out with improved efficacy.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85791", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85792" } }
{"authors":"Nathaniel Chaney::Princeton University--Eric Wood::Princeton University--", "title":"H43H-1622: Field-scale land surface modeling over continental extents: Applications in satellite remote sensing of soil moisture", "abstract":"Existing land surface models (LSM) struggle to accurately represent the observed field-scale (~100 meters) spatial heterogeneity of soil moisture due to the over-simplistic parameterizations of sub-grid heterogeneity and the coarseness of the model input data. This is especially relevant in the context of satellite remote sensing of soil moisture since land surface models are seen as important tools with which to validate high-resolution soil moisture retrievals. To address this challenge, we have developed HydroBloks, a semi-distributed land surface model that uses hydrologic response units (HRUs) to represent the observed field-scale spatial heterogeneity of soil moisture while maintaining the computational efficiency of existing LSMs. To accomplish this goal, HydroBloks couples the Noah-MP land surface model to the Dynamic TOPMODEL hydrologic model. The HRUs are defined by clustering proxies of the drivers of spatial heterogeneity using field-scale land data (e.g., NLCD). This allows for each HRU's results to be readily mapped out in space, enabling model application and validation at sub-100 meter scales. In this study, HydroBloks is implemented at three USDA watersheds over the contiguous United States (Little Washita, Little River, and Walnut Gulch). HydroBloks is run at each watershed between 2004 and 2014 using a 100 Latin Hypercube Sample to account for model parameter uncertainty. Each catchment's model ensemble is constrained and validated using available in-situ top-layer soil moisture observations. The results from this study provide insight into the strengths and weaknesses of existing soil moisture networks and the model’s potential applications for improved design of in-situ soil moisture networks.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85792", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85793" } }
{"authors":"Julie Van Bui::San Jose State University--Saul Perez-Montano::San Jose State University--Eric Li::San Jose State University--Thomas Nelson::San Jose State University--Kieu Ha::San Jose State University--Linda Leong::San Jose State University--Laura Iraci::NASA Ames Research Center--Annalise Van Wyngarden::San Jose State University--", "title":"A13E-0401: Aldol Condensation Products and Polyacetals in Organic Films Formed from Reactions of Propanal in Sulfuric Acid at Upper Troposphere/Lower Stratosphere (UT/LS) Aerosol Acidities", "abstract":"Aerosols in the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere (UT/LS) consist mostly of concentrated sulfuric acid (40-80 wt. %) which is highly reflective towards UV and visible radiation. However, airborne measurements have shown that these particles may also contain a significant amount of organic material. Experiments combining organics (propanal, glyoxal and/or methylglyoxal) with sulfuric acid at concentrations typical of UT/LS aerosols produced highly colored surface films (and solutions) that have the potential to impact chemical, optical and/or cloud-forming properties of aerosols. In order to assess the potential for such films to impact aerosol chemistry or climate properties, experiments were performed to identify the chemical processes responsible for film formation. Surface films were analyzed via Attenuated Total Reflectance-FTIR and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance spectroscopies and are shown to consist primarily of aldol condensation products and cyclic and linear polyacetals, the latter of which are likely responsible for separation from the aqueous phase.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85793", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85794" } }
{"authors":"Nelson Pulido Hernandez::National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention--Daisuke Inazu::University of Tokyo--Tatsuhiko Saito::National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention--Jouji Senda::National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention--Eiichi Fukuyama::National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention--Hiroyuki Kumagai::Nagoya University--", "title":"NH23A-1872: Real time earthquake information and tsunami estimation system for Indonesia, Philippines and Central-South American regions", "abstract":"Southeast Asia as well as Central-South American regions are within the most active seismic regions in the world. To contribute to the understanding of source process of earthquakes the National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention NIED maintains the international seismic Network (ISN) since 2007. Continuous seismic waveforms from 294 broadband seismic stations in Indonesia, Philippines, and Central-South America regions are received in real time at NIED, and used for automatic location of seismic events. Using these data we perform automatic and manual estimation of moment tensor of seismic events (Mw>4.5) by using the SWIFT program developed at NIED. We simulate the propagation of local tsunamis in these regions using a tsunami simulation code and visualization system developed at NIED, combined with CMT parameters estimated by SWIFT. The goals of the system are to provide a rapid and reliable earthquake and tsunami information in particular for large seismic, and produce an appropriate database of earthquake source parameters and tsunami simulations for research. The system uses the hypocenter location and magnitude of earthquakes automatically determined at NIED by the SeisComP3 system (GFZ) from the continuous seismic waveforms in the region, to perform the automated calculation of moment tensors by SWIFT, and then carry out the automatic simulation and visualization of tsunami. The system generates maps of maximum tsunami heights within the target regions and along the coasts and display them with the fault model parameters used for tsunami simulations. Tsunami calculations are performed for all events with available automatic SWIFT/CMT solutions. Tsunami calculations are re-computed using SWIFT manual solutions for events with Mw>5.5 and centroid depths shallower than 100 km. Revised maximum tsunami heights as well as animation of tsunami propagation are also calculated and displayed for the two double couple solutions by SWIFT. Acknowledgments Real-time seismic data from Indonesia and Philippines is received at NIED in the framework of cooperative research projects with BMKG (Indonesia), PHIVOLCS (Philippines), and GFZ (Germany). Seismic data from Central and South America is obtained from IRIS as well as the Integrated Plate Boundary Observatory of Chile.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85794", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85795" } }
{"authors":"Suzanne Ali::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"MR11A-08: Using the 2D VISAR to Study Dynamic Fracture and Deformation in Diamond", "abstract":"We have utilized the newly developed 2D VISAR diagnostic, in combination with the existing line-VISAR, to study heterogeneous deformation and fracture in micro- and nanocrystalline diamond. Diamond samples were shock compressed using a high energy laser drive. We obtained images and velocity maps of deformation and fracture that provide an unprecedented view into material response at the breakout surface. Our data show velocity roughening at the breakout surface as a result of spall fracture in free surface samples and as a result of the compressional inelastic wave and reflected release wave in tamped samples. The larger increase in velocity roughness associated with the microdiamond samples agrees with previously obtained data indicating a loss of reflectivity on breakout for microdiamond shock compression. Using the observed fragment size for spall fracture in the microcrystalline and nanocrystalline diamond, and Grady’s model for spall fracture fragment size as a function of strain rate, we have found values for the micro- and nanocrystalline fracture toughness of 103±14 MPa m1/2 and 44±8 MPa m1/2, respectively. Using these values for the fracture toughness, the strain rate dependent spall stresses were calculated and found to agree with previous research.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85795", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85796" } }
{"authors":"Jared Smith::University of New Mexico Main Campus--Laura Crossey::University of New Mexico Main Campus--Karl Karlstrom::University of New Mexico Main Campus--Tobias Fischer::University of New Mexico--Hyunwoo Lee::University of New Mexico--Christopher McGibbon::University of New Mexico--", "title":"V43C-3171: Fault Networks in the Northwestern Albuquerque Basin and Their Potential Role in Controlling Mantle CO2 Degassing and Fluid Migration from the Valles Caldera", "abstract":"The Rio Grande rift (RGR) has Quaternary and active volcanism and faulting that provide a field laboratory for examining links between mantle degassing and faults as fluid conduits. Diffuse and spring CO2 flux measurements were taken at 6 sites in the northwestern Albuquerque Basin (NWAB) and Valles caldera geothermal system. All sites progress to the southwest from the 1.25 Ma Valles caldera, down the rift-related Jemez fault network, to intersect with the Nacimiento fault system. Mantle CO2 and He degassing are well documented at 5 of 6 sites, with decreasing 3He/4He ratios away from the caldera. The instrument used to measure CO2 flux was an EGM-4 CO2 gas analyzer (PP systems) with an accumulation chamber. Carbonic springs at Penasco Springs (PS) and San Ysidro (SY), and the carbonate-cemented Sand Hill Fault (SHF) were targeted, all near the western border of the RGR. The SHF has no spring activity, had the smallest maximum flux of all the sites (8 g/m2d), but carbonate along the fault zone (<2 m wide) attest to past CO2 flux. The other two sites are equal distance (30-40 km) between the SHF site and Valles caldera sites. These sites have active carbonic springs that precipitate travertine mounds. Our work suggests these sites reflect intersections of the Nacimiento fault with NE trending faults that connect to the Jemez fault network. The maximum diffuse flux recorded at SY (297 g/m2d) and PS (25 g/m2d) are high, especially along the fault and near springs. At SY and PS the instruments capacity was exceeded (2,400 g/m2d) at 6 of 9 springs. Interpretations indicate a direct CO2 flux through a fault-related artesian aquifer system that is connected to magmatic gases from the caldera. Maximum diffuse flux measurements of Alamo Canyon (20,906 g/m2d), Sulphur Springs (2,400 g/m2d) and Soda Dam (1,882 g/m2d) at Valles caldera geothermal sites are comparable to Yellowstone geothermal systems. We use geospatial analysis and local geologic mapping to examine relationships of CO2 flux to structure. Travertine mounds can create impermeable barriers that modify near-surface degassing patterns, making it difficult to decipher where CO2 and fluids preferentially migrate up the damage zones in the hanging-wall or footwall. Future work will utilize grids to more accurately assess the localized affect fault zones have on CO2 flux rates.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85796", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85797" } }
{"authors":"Jason Coenen::Northern Illinois University--Reed Scherer::Northern Illinois University--Sophie Warny::LSU--Isla Castañeda::University of Massachusetts Amherst--Ross Powell::Northern Illinois Univ.--Slawek Tulaczyk::University of California Santa Cruz--Rebecca Puttkammer::Northern Illinois University--Timothy Hodson::Northern Illinois University--Jeremy Wei::Stanford University--", "title":"C11C-0771: Whillans Ice Stream from UpB to WGZ: Siliceous Microfossils, Palynomorphs, and Biomarker Evidence of Sub-glacial Processes and Ice Stream History", "abstract":"We report micropaleontological results from sediment cores from Subglacial Lake Whillans (SLW) and the Whillans Grounding Zone (WGZ), in West Antarctica, collected as part of the WISSARD project. Diatoms and other microfossils provide biostratigraphic and paleoenvironmental constraints, inferences regarding ice stream erosion, particulate provenance and glacial mixing. Most subglacial samples contain a mixture of eroded diatoms which reflect initial deposition throughout the Cenozoic. Pleistocene diatoms reflect erosion of marine sediments deposited in the West Antarctic during ice sheet retreat events. Miocene diatoms reflect extensive Miocene deposition before entering a dominantly glacial phase. Additionally, Paleogene fossils, both marine and non-marine occur widely, reflecting deeper erosion and provide insights into basin history. SLW contains Upper Miocene fossils with a mix of younger and older marine taxa and Paleogene pollen and spores. These ages and taxa are consistent with samples from 200 km upstream at the Whillans Ice Stream (UpB), suggesting a connection between the sites with little evidence of new erosion of material between these sites. Diatom fragment abundance is on average lower than UpB suggesting sediments have experienced additional cumulative shearing and transport. Biomarker data is used to understand changes in inputs from terrestrial and marine components. UpB has a stronger terrestrial signal, compared with SLW further illustrating mixing and transport of sediments. WGZ cores exhibit stratigraphic variation in microfossil abundance as well as a transition in age dominance of taxa. The upper 25cm of the sediment core is characterized by an assemblage of Upper Miocene dominating taxa which largely represent rain-out from melting debris-laden ice, but also includes consistent occurrences of Late Pleistocene diatoms. A radiolarian encasing a modern pelagic diatom assemblage was noted at 26cm. An interval, from 45 cm down core contains significantly more abundant diatoms than the upper layers, and below that is a Paleogene-dominated assemblage. The stratigraphic variability at the grounding zone indicates changes in sediment provenance, indicating a variable glaciological regime including a dynamic grounding line and potential input from the Mercer Ice Stream.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85797", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85798" } }
{"authors":"Glynis Lough::U.S. Global Change Research Program--", "title":"GC12B-01: Special Assessment Reports: A Critical Part of the Sustained National Climate Assessment Process", "abstract":"The U.S. Global Change Research program is conducting a sustained National Climate Assessment process that will ultimately facilitate continuous and transparent participation of scientists and stakeholders across regions and sectors, enabling new information and insights to be synthesized as they emerge. Focused scientific assessments, such as the Second State of the Carbon Cycle Report (SOCCR-2), are a critical component of the process, as they synthesize new science and provide decision makers with actionable information. These special assessments provide opportunities for scientific experts and decision makers to share knowledge about the climate-related issues, impacts, and potential response actions that are most important to a particular topic, region, or sector. The development process for USGCRP’s sustained assessment products is also highly transparent in order to produce results that are credible, salient, and legitimate for both scientists and stakeholders. Ultimately, the rigorous and transparent process makes the results of scientific assessments of climate-related information extremely useful to decision makers.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85798", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85799" } }
{"authors":"Keith Cherkauer::Purdue University--Nagendra Singh::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Moetasim Ashfaq::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Deeksha Rastogi::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--", "title":"H13J-1725: Food Security Hotspots in India under Changing Climate and Growing Populatio", "abstract":"Global climate change, unprecedented population growth, and rapid urbanization have elevated the possibility of food and water shortages in many regions across the world. The likelihood of such shortages in the future is further exacerbated by the fact that increased greenhouse forcing and rapid growth in human population will continue for at least the next several decades. These socio-environmental changes will likely put some regions under enormous economic and environmental stress by forcing them to adapt to new conditions. India with its rapidly growing population and high rates of urbanization and industrialization is one such region whose agricultural resources will be particularly vulnerable to the impact of these changes. This study collectively reviews and analyses the possible impacts of climate change, population growth and resulting land use change on the availability of food and water in the coming decades for India. By analyzing and fusing a wide variety of existing data and research on the impact of land use change, population, and climate change, on water and food resources this study develops an understanding of the broader implications of each of the changes on food security in the region. In addition, the study focuses on the need to assess and quantify the combination of such impacts at a regional level and identify food security hotspots spatially across India that will help to narrow down regions in the country which will be severely affected and need priority adaptation and mitigation measures.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85799", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85800" } }
{"authors":"Kimberly Williams-Guillen::Organization Not Listed--Sarah Otterstrom::Paso Pacifico--Claudia Perla::Paso Pacifico--", "title":"B23F-0660: Diversified Native Species Restoration for Recovery of Multiple Ecosystem Services in a Highly Disturbed Tropical Dry Forest Landscape of Southwestern Nicaragua", "abstract":"Tropical dry forests have been reduced to a fraction of their original extent in the Neotropics due to conversion to agriculture and cattle pasture. While TDF can recover via natural regeneration, resulting forests are dominated by wind-dispersed pioneer species of limited value for frugivorous wildlife. Additionally, passive restoration can be perceived as “abandonment” resulting in neighbors casually invading property to rear livestock and extract timber. In 2007, the NGO Paso Pacífico initiated restoration in a highly degraded tropical dry forest landscape of southwestern Nicaragua; funded by an ex-ante carbon purchase, the project was designed to integrate multiple native tree species known to provide resources used by local wildlife. We restored roughly 400 hectares spanning a rainfall gradient from dry to transitional moist forest, using reforestation (planting 70 species of tree seedlings in degraded pastures on a 4x4 m grid, leaving occurring saplings) and assisted regeneration (clearing vines and competing vegetation from saplings in natural regeneration and strategically managing canopy cover). In just over seven years, mean carbon increased nearly threefold, from to 21.5±5.0 to 57.9±9.6 SE tonnes/ha. Current carbon stocks match those of 20-year-old forests in the area, accumulated in less than a decade. Stem density per 15-m radius plot decreased from 16.3±2.3 to 12.5±0.9 SE, while species richness increased from 3.9±0.4 to 18.4±1.4 SE. Alpha richness of woody stems across plots increased from 36 to 94 species, and over 20 tree species established as a result of natural dispersal and recruitment. We have observed sensitive species such as spider monkeys and parrots foraging in restoration areas. Managed reforestation is a highly effective method for rapidly restoring the functionality of multiple ecosystem services in degraded TDF, particularly when social and political realities force restoration to coexist with human productive activities. Project techniques were developed in collaboration with local community members and incorporated indigenous practices regarding lunar cycles, intercropping, and other management aspects. We suggest that this integration was a critical aspect to project success, and that these approaches could be widely adapted throughout Central America.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85800", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85801" } }
{"authors":"Toshihiko Sugai::Univ Tokyo--Takenori Sato::Geospatial Information Authority of Japan--", "title":"EP41A-0901: Last 900 ka river longprofile changes controlled by Yoro fault activity and glacial sea-level changes, Nobi plain, central Japan", "abstract":"This paper compared grain size, thickness, and lithological character of ten fluvial gravel layers formed during the glacial sea-level lowstands intervening inner bay mud layers deposited during the interglacial marine transgressional periods since the last 900 ka by integrated analyses of sediment cores including 600 m deep onein the Nobi plain, central Japan. Linkages between river long profile changes and sea-level and climate changes will be discussed. The Nobi basin is one of the representative delta type alluvial lowlands in Japan dominated by longitudinal drainage system named Kiso river system flowing southward from central Japan Alps with abundant water and sediment discharges. The basin bounded by the Yoro fault on the west has been tilted westward by the repetitive faulting activity. The basin stratigraphy and its stacking patterns suggest uniform and rapid subsidence and tilting rates of the basin with the maximum value of 1 mm yr-1 and 10-4 kyr-1 respectively produced by the Yoro fault activity under the W-E compressional regional stress field during the middle and late Quaternary periods. Tephrochronological, paleomagnetic, geochemical, and diatom analyses enabled to identify ten times repeated marine transgression–regression sequences correlated with full glacial-interglacial sea-level changes during the last 900 ka. All of the ten sequence boundaries were characterized by fluvial gravel layers were formed by the Kiso river system. The mean maximum gravel size is proportional to the magnitude of sea level lowering inferred from MIS curve, i.e. gravels deposited in MIS 12 and 16 are the largest, and those in MIS 14 and 8 are the smallest since MIS 16. This suggests that the longitudinal profile of the Kiso river system has been adjusting to the sea level changes and that the steeper longitudinal profile formed in the lower sea level periods can transport larger gravels to the drilling sites. In fact the present river bed gravel size is in proportion with the tractive force and mainly controlled by slope of the rive long-profile.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85801", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85802" } }
{"authors":"Kanani Lee::Yale University--Tingting Gu::Yale University--Mingming Li::Arizona State University--Catherine McCammon::University of Bayreuth--", "title":"DI44A-05: The Mantle-Atmosphere Connection: Oxidation of the Atmosphere through Mantle Convection", "abstract":"Earth’s mantle connects the surface with the deep interior through convection, and the evolution of its redox state will affect the distribution of siderophile elements1, recycling of refractory isotopes2 and the oxidation state of the atmosphere through volcanic outgassing3. The rise of oxygen in atmosphere, i.e., the Great Oxidation Event (G.O.E.) occurred ~2.4 billion years ago (Ga)4. However, multiple lines of evidence point to biological oxygen production well before 2.4 Ga5; while chromium isotopes in iron formations indicates a decline of atmospheric oxygen about 1.88 Ga6. In contrast to the fluctuation of atmospheric oxygen, vanadium in Archean mantle lithosphere suggests that the mantle redox state has been constant for ~3.5 Ga7. Indeed, the redox state of the deep Earth’s interior is not well constrained8 and its effect on mantle dynamics is unknown. Here we show a redox-induced density difference affects mantle convection and may potentially cause the oxidation of the upper mantle. From two synthetic enstatite chondritic samples with identical bulk compositions but formed under different oxygen fugacities (fO2) compressed to lower mantle pressures and temperatures, we find Al2O3 forms its own phase separate from the dominant Mg-silicate perovskite phase (i.e., bridgmanite9) in the more reduced composition, in contrast to a more Al-rich, bridgmanite-dominated assemblage for a more oxidized starting composition. As a result, the reduced material is ~1-1.5% denser than the oxidized material. Geodynamical numerical simulations show that the redox-induced density difference could lead to an increased oxidation of Earth’s upper mantle but is buffered by slow mixing with more reduced material through hot upwellings, which will potentially affect mantle redox and rise of oxygen in atmosphere.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85802", "section":"Earth's Deep Interior"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85803" } }
{"authors":"Kimberly Seelos::Applied Physics Laboratory Johns Hopkins--Frank Seelos::JHU APL--Christina Viviano-Beck::Applied Physics Laboratory Johns Hopkins--Scott Murchie::Applied Physics Laboratory Johns Hopkins--", "title":"P43D-2139: New Mineralogic Diversity in the Noachian Crust of Tyrrhena Terra, Mars", "abstract":"The cratered Noachian highlands region of Mars is host to hundreds to thousands of exposures of hydrated minerals. Areas of the highlands that are relatively free of dust, such as Tyrrhena Terra, have been previously examined using Mars Express/OMEGA and MRO/CRISM visible/near-IR reflectance data. The inferred alteration mineralogy is consistent with formation under low water to rock ratio, relatively low T/P and shallow crustal conditions. The vast majority of occurrences are associated with impact craters with a wide range of diameters, and within not only central peaks, but also rims and ejecta. This implies that most outcrops are a result of the excavation of pre-existing mineralology, not formation in-situ by post-impact hydrothermalism. Types of minerals reported include, most commonly, Fe/Mg phyllosilicates (smectite, chlorite, mixed-layer clays, prehnite, serpentine, illite), and less commonly, Al-phyllosilicates (e.g., kaolinite), carbonates, zeolites (e.g., analcime), and hydrated silica. Here we document and characterize the occurrence of an additional class of mineralogy in Noachian terrain: hydrated sulfates. Hydrated sulfates are observed in the central peaks and (in one case) the proximal ejecta of 3 craters dispersed across the region. In each crater, a diverse assemblage of other hydrated alteration minerals is also apparent and includes prehnite, carbonate, zeolite, Fe/Mg smectite, and chlorite. Two of the three craters are approximately 10 km in diameter, with resulting sulfate exhumation depths in the central peaks approaching 1 km. The third crater has a diameter of 25 km; however, uplift and ejecta from several pre-existing impacts reduce the possible sulfate excavation depth to 1.3 km. CRISM spectra are consistent with a poly-hydrated sulfate, with major absorptions centered at 1.45, 1.95, and 2.4 micrometers – similar to, but distinct from, many zeolites. While mono-hydrated and poly-hydrated sulfates are not uncommon to other areas of Mars, they are generally relegated to younger, layered sedimentary settings (e.g., Valles Marineris, Meridiani Planum). If confirmed, the formation of hydrated sulfates in Noachian-aged terrain substantially adds to our understanding of the complexity of the early Mars environment.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85803", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85804" } }
{"authors":"Mauricio Montecinos::Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile--Pablo Pasten::Centro de Desarrollo Urbano Sustentable--Marina Coquery::IRSTEA--Gonzalo Pizarro::Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile--María Abarca::Pontifical Catholic University of Chile--Guillermo Arce::Pontifical Catholic University of Chile--", "title":"H13L-1766: Geochemical and Hydrologic Controls of Copper-Rich Surface Waters in the Yerba Loca-Mapocho System", "abstract":"Andean watersheds in Northern and Central Chile are naturally enriched with metals, many of them associated to sulfide mineralizations related to copper mining districts. The natural and anthropogenic influx of toxic metals into drinking water sources pose a sustainability challenge for cities that need to provide safe water with the smallest footprint. This work presents our study of the transformations of copper in the Yerba Loca-Mapocho system. Our sampling campaign started from the headwaters at La Paloma Glacier and continues to the inlet of the San Enrique drinking water treatment plant, a system feeding municipalities in the Eastern area of Santiago, Chile. Depending on the season, total copper concentrations go as high as 22 mg/L for the upper sections, which become diluted to <5 mg/L downstream. pH ranged from 3 to 5.6 while suspended solids ranged from <10 to 100 mg/L. We used Geochemist Workbench to assess copper speciation and to evaluate the thermodynamic controls for the formation and dissolution of solid phases. A sediment trap was used to concentrate suspended particulate matter, which was analyzed with ICP-MS, TXRF (total reflection X ray fluorescence) and XRD (X-ray diffraction). Major elements detected in the precipitates were Al (200 g/kg), S (60 g/kg), and Cu (6 g/kg). Likely solid phases include hydrous amorphous phases of aluminum hydroxides and sulfates, and copper hydroxides/carbonates. Efforts are undergoing to find the optimal mixing ratios between the acidic stream and more alkaline streams to maximize attenuation of dissolved copper. The results of this research could be used for enhancing in-stream natural attenuation of copper and reducing treatment needs at the drinking water facility. Acknowledgements to Fondecyt 1130936 and Conicyt Fondap 15110020", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85804", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85805" } }
{"authors":"Julie Newman::Texas A & M University College Station--Basil Tikoff::Univ Wisconsin--J. Walker::University of Kansas--Jessica Good::Arizona Geological Survey--Zachary Michels::University of Wisconsin Madison--Jason Ash::University of Kansas--Joseph Andrew::University of Kansas--Randolph Williams::University of Wisconsin-Madison Geology--Stephen Richard::Arizona Geological Survey--", "title":"IN21E-04: Development of Structural Geology and Tectonics Data System with Field and Lab Interface", "abstract":"We have developed a prototype Data System for Structural Geology and Tectonics (SG&T). The goal of this effort is to enable recording and sharing data within the geoscience community, to encourage interdisciplinary research, and to facilitate the investigation of scientific questions that cannot currently be addressed. The development of the Data System emphasizes community input in order to build a system that encompasses the needs of researchers, in terms of data and usability. SG&T data is complex for a variety of reasons, including the wide range of temporal and spatial scales (many orders of magnitude each), the complex three-dimensional geometry of some geological structures, inherent spatial nature of the data, and the difficulty of making temporal inferences from spatial observations. To successful implement the step of developing a SG&T data system, we must simultaneously solve three problems: 1) How to digitize SG&T data; 2) How to design a software system that is applicable; and 3) How to construct a very flexible user interface. To address the first problem, we introduce the “Spot” concept, which allows tracking of hierarchical and spatial relations between structures at all scales, and will link map scale, mesoscale, and laboratory scale data. A Spot, in this sense, is analogous to the beam size of analytical equipment used for in situ analysis of rocks; it is the size over which a measurement or quantity is applicable. A Spot can be a single measurement, an aggregation of individual measurements, or even establish relationships between numerous other Spots. We address the second problem through the use of a Graph database to better preserve the myriad of potentially complex relationships. In order to construct a flexible user interface that follows a natural workflow, and that serves the needs of the community, we have begun the process of engaging the SG&T community in order to utilize the expertise of a large group of scientists to ensure the quality and usability of this data system. These activities have included Town Halls, subdiscipline-specific workshops to develop community standards, and pilot projects to test the data system in the field during the study of a variety of geologic structures.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85805", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85806" } }
{"authors":"Craig Glenn::University of Hawaii at Manoa--Joseph Kennedy::University of Hawaii at Manoa--Henrieta Dulaiova::University of Hawaii at Manoa--Jacque Kelly::Georgia Southern University--Paul Lucey::Hawaii Inst Geophys & Planetol--Eunhee Lee::Korea Institute of Geoscience & Mineral Research--Joseph Fackrell::University of Hawaii at Manoa--", "title":"H34E-06: Integration of In Situ Radon Modeling with High Resolution Aerial Remote Sensing for Mapping and Quantifying Local to Regional Flow and Transport of Submarine Groundwater Discharge from Coastal Aquifers", "abstract":"Submarine groundwater discharge (SGD) is a principal conduit for huge volumes of fresh groundwater loss and is a key transport mechanism for nutrient and contaminant pollution to coastal zones worldwide. However, the volumes and spatially and temporally variable nature of SGD is poorly known and requires rapid and high-resolution data acquisition at the scales in which it is commonly observed. Airborne thermal infrared (TIR) remote sensing, using high-altitude manned aircraft and low-altitude remote-controlled unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs or ` Drones` ) are uniquely qualified for this task, and applicable wherever 0.1°C temperature contrasts exist between discharging and receiving waters. We report on the use of these technologies in combination with in situ radon model studies of SGD volume and nutrient flux from three of the largest Hawaiian Islands. High altitude manned aircraft results produce regional (~300m wide x 100s km coastline) 0.5 to 3.2 m-resolution sea-surface temperature maps accurate to 0.7°C that show point-source and diffuse flow in exquisite detail. Using UAVs offers cost-effective advantages of higher spatial and temporal resolution and instantaneous deployments that can be coordinated simultaneously with any ground-based effort. We demonstrate how TIR-mapped groundwater discharge plume areas may be linearly and highly correlated to in situ groundwater fluxes. We also illustrate how in situ nutrient data may be incorporated into infrared imagery to produce nutrient distribution maps of regional worth. These results illustrate the potential for volumetric quantification and up-scaling of small- to regional-scale SGD. These methodologies provide a tremendous advantage for identifying and differentiating spring-fed, point-sourced, and/or diffuse groundwater discharge into oceans, estuaries, and streams. The integrative techniques are also important precursors for developing best-use and cost-effective strategies for otherwise time-consuming in situ studies, and represent a substantial new asset for land use and coastal zone research and management.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85806", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85807" } }
{"authors":"Rachel Abercrombie::Boston University--Kasey Aderhold::Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology--", "title":"T43C-3010: Along Strike Heterogeneity of Seismic Slip Revealed by Oceanic Transform Fault Earthquakes", "abstract":"Oceanic transform faults (OTFs) are considered to have relatively simple structure [thermal, geometric, compositional], with the brittle-ductile transition defined by the 600-800ºC isotherm. Earthquakes on these faults account for less than half of the expected slip (Boettcher & Jordan, 2004), leaving the majority of motion to be accommodated aseismically. The 2015 MW7.1 Charlie-Gibbs transform earthquake is the latest of seven large [M≥6.25] earthquakes that form two quasi-repeating sequences dating back to 1920. These two sequences are separated by a region of persistent aseismicity in the center of the transform, interpreted to be a rupture barrier that prevents the full extent of the transform from rupturing in a single earthquake. However, aseismic rupture barriers alone cannot account for the inferred deficit in the seismic budget of OTFs. A growing catalogue of slip distributions has revealed distinctive behavior for large OTF earthquakes. We present evidence from teleseismic body wave modeling for directivity and slip distribution of four MW ≥ 7.0 oceanic strike-slip earthquakes: the 2015 MW7.1 Charlie-Gibbs transform earthquake in the North Atlantic, the 2015 MW7.0 Fourier transform earthquake in the South Atlantic, and the 2013 MW7.3 and 2006 MW7.4 South Sandwich transform earthquakes in the Southern Ocean. Each earthquake initiates near the ridge with nominal slip then propagates unilaterally to rupture larger asperities nearer the middle of the transform, similar to behavior observed for the 1994 MW7.0 Romanche transform earthquake. Significant continental strike-slip earthquakes, such as the 2002 MW7.9 Denali earthquake and the 2001 MW7.8 Kunlun earthquake, also exhibit unilateral ruptures with a small initial slip. The slip distributions of large oceanic transform earthquakes suggest that seismic coupling of OTFs varies considerably along strike, with large slip asperities separated by areas of little or no slip. Substantial earthquakes are not observed in these areas of unresolvable co-seismic slip. This suggests that motion is accommodated both aseismically during the interseismic period and seismically during large earthquakes. Such multimode fault behavior has implications for quantifying seismic hazard along other faults with aseismic and creeping sections.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85807", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85808" } }
{"authors":"Mekonnen Gebremichael::University of California Los Angeles--", "title":"H13H-1666: Evaluation of IMERG Satellite Rainfall Estimates in the Blue Nile Basin", "abstract":"The demand for accurate satellite rainfall products is increasing particularly in Africa where ground-based data are mostly unavailable, timely inaccessible, or unreliable. In this study, the accuracy of IMERG satellite rainfall products is assessed over the Blue Nile River Basin, a basin characterized by complex terrain and tropical monsoon. The assessment is made using relatively-dense experimental networks of rain gauges deployed at two, 0.25°×0.25°, sites that represent contrasting topographic features: the lowland plain (mean elevation of 719 m.a.s.l.) site and the highland mountain (mean elevation of 2268 m.a.s.l.). The investigation period covers the summer seasons of 2014 and 2015. Compared to the highland mountain site, the lowland plain site exhibits marked extremes of rain intensity, higher rain intensity, lower frequency of rain occurrence, and smaller seasonal rainfall accumulation. We present the detailed error characteristics of the IMERG products at both the lowland plain and highland mountain.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85808", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85809" } }
{"authors":"Amy Hudson::University of Maryland College Park--Matthew Hansen::University of Maryland--", "title":"H53F-1721: Global 30m 2000-2014 Surface Water Dynamics Map Derived from All Landsat 5, 7, and 8", "abstract":"Water is critical for human life, agriculture, and ecosystems. A better understanding of where it is and how it is changing will enable better management of this valuable resource and guide protection of sensitive ecological areas. Global water maps have typically been representations of surface water at one given time. However, there is both seasonal and interannual variability: rivers meander, lakes disappear, floods arise. To address this ephemeral nature of water, in this study University of Maryland has developed a method that analyzes every Landsat 5, 7, and 8 scene from 1999-2015 to produce global seasonal maps (Winter, Spring, Summer, Fall) of surface water dynamics from 2000-2014. Each Landsat scene is automatically classified into land, water, cloud, haze, shadow, and snow via a decision tree algorithm. The land and water observations are aggregated per pixel into percent occurrence of water in a 3 year moving window for each meteorological season. These annual water percentages form a curve for each season that is discretized into a continuous 3 band RGB map. Frequency of water observation and type of surface water change (loss, gain, peak, or dip) is clearly seen through brightness and hue respectively. Additional data layers include: the year the change began, peak year, minimum year, and the year the change process ended. Currently these maps have been created for 18 1°x1° test tiles scattered around the world, and a portion of the September-November map over Bangladesh is shown below. The entire Landsat archive from 1999-2015 will be processed through a partnership with Google Earth Engine to complete the global product in the coming months. In areas where there is sufficient satellite data density (e.g. the United States), this project could be expanded to 1984-2015. This study provides both scientific researchers and the public an understandable, temporally rich, and globally consistent map showing surface water changes over time.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85809", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85810" } }
{"authors":"Chang Ho Woo::KAIST Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology--Kyunghwan Dokgo::KAIST Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology--Kyoung Min::KAIST Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology--Junga Hwang::KASI Korea Astronomy and Space Science Institute--", "title":"SM31B-2500: PIC simulation of plasma waves above lunar magnetic anomaly", "abstract":"We simulated the interaction between solar wind and lunar magnetic anomaly. Reiner Gamma anomaly (7.4°N, 300.9°E) and average solar wind parameters are used for our simulation. To increase spatial resolution for wave analysis, simulation geometry was restricted to 2-dimension. At the top of simulation box, continuous solar wind particle injection was designed to reproduce steady solar wind condition and particles left through the bottom side of simulation box. Mini-magnetosphere was formed above the lunar surface as a result of the interaction between solar wind particle and dipole magnetic field. As it affect incident solar wind particles, electromagnetic field fluctuations were generated and wave structures were observed above mini magnetosphere.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85810", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85811" } }
{"authors":"Steven Reising::Colorado State University--Pekka Kangaslahti::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Erich Schlecht::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Xavier Bosch-Lluis::Colorado State University--Mehmet Ogut::Colorado State University--Sharmila Padmanabhan::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Richard Cofield::Jet Propulsion Lab--Nacer Chahat::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Shannon Brown::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Jonathan Jiang::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--William Deal::Northrop Grumman Corporation Redondo Beach--Alex Zamora::Northrop Grumman Corporation Redondo Beach--Kevin Leong::Northrop Grumman Corporation Redondo Beach--Sean Shih::Northrop Grumman Corporation Redondo Beach--Gerry Mei::Northrop Grumman Corporation Redondo Beach--", "title":"A53A-0369: Development of the Tropospheric Water Vapor and Cloud ICE (TWICE) Millimeter- and Sub-millimeter Wave Radiometer Instrument for 6U-Class Nanosatellites", "abstract":"Measurements of upper-tropospheric water vapor and cloud ice at a variety of local times are critically needed to provide information not currently available from microwave sensors in sun-synchronous orbits. Such global measurements would enable increasingly accurate cloud and moisture simulations in global circulation models, improving both climate predictions and knowledge of their uncertainty. In addition, this capability would address the need for measurements of cloud ice particle size distribution and water content in both clean and polluted environments. Complementary measurements of aerosol pollution would allow investigation of its effects on cloud properties and climate. This is particularly important since the uncertainty in the aerosol effect on climate is at least four times as great as the uncertainty in greenhouse gas effects. To address this unmet need, a collaborative team among Colorado State University, Caltech Jet Propulsion Laboratory and Northrop Grumman Corporation is developing and fabricating the Tropospheric Water and Cloud ICE (TWICE) radiometer instrument. TWICE is designed with size, mass, power consumption and downlink data rate compatible with deployment aboard a 6U-Class nanosatellite. TWICE is advancing the state of the art of spaceborne millimeter- and submillimeter-wave radiometers by transitioning from Schottky mixer-based front ends to InP HEMT MMIC low-noise amplifier front ends, substantially reducing the radiometer’s mass, volume and power consumption. New low-noise amplifiers and related front-end components are being designed and fabricated by JPL and Northrop Grumman based on InP HEMT MMIC technology up to 670 GHz. The TWICE instrument will provide 16 radiometer channels, including window frequencies near 240, 310 and 670 GHz to perform ice particle sizing and determine total ice water content, as well as four sounding channels each near 118 GHz for temperature sounding and near 183 GHz and 380 GHz for water vapor sounding during nearly all weather conditions, particularly useful in the upper troposphere in the presence of ice clouds.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85811", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85812" } }
{"authors":"Samuel Rochelle::Arizona State University--Ariel Anbar::Arizona State University--Hilairy Hartnett::Arizona State University--Stephen Romaniello::Arizona State University--Amisha Poret-Peterson::Arizona State University--", "title":"B21A-0415: Developing a Metal Proxy for the Rise of Early Terrestrial Life", "abstract":"Previous work has shown that the presence of biological soil crusts (BSCs) may affect the concentrations of uranium and other transition metals by influencing metal dissolution, solubility, and transport.(1) These effects may provide a proxy for the presence of microbial mat communities in paleosols, possibly constraining the timing of the rise of early terrestrial ecosystems. Thus, in an effort to uncover possible biosignatures, this study examines metal abundances in modern desert BSCs as a possible analogue for early terrestrial life. We present results from a preliminary study comparing crusted and uncrusted soils from a low-desert site near Casa Grande, Arizona. Seventeen 5-cm soil cores were collected and the bulk elemental composition of the top 1 cm of crusted (9 samples) and non-crusted (8 samples) soils were analyzed by quadrupole ICP-MS with a typical measurement precision between 2-5%. Metal concentrations were normalized to aluminum (Al) to minimize dilution effects due to variations in carbonate and quartz content. Although the mean concentrations of nearly all elements were similar in crusted and uncrusted sites, the variability in the normalized concentrations of some of the elements, such as uranium, were different between crusted and uncrusted sites. The average U/Al ratio at the crusted site was 25 ± 1 µg U/ g Al and the average U/Al ratio at the uncrusted site was 27 ± 4 µg U/ g Al. Bartlett’s and Levene’s tests were used to confirm that the U/Al ratio was significantly more variable in the uncrusted sites as compared to the crusted sites. Iron (Fe), vanadium (V) and cesium (Cs) showed a similar pattern which was significant under Bartlett’s but not Levene’s test. As U, Fe, and V solubility and transport are redox-sensitive, we hypothesize that their aqueous mobility could have been impacted by diurnal redox swings in the photosynthetic crusts, possibly resulting in the homogenization of local cm-scale variations in background soil concentrations. Future work will test this hypothesis by 1) analyzing samples from a wider range of sites to determine if this pattern is robust and 2) measuring 238U/235U ratios throughout the crust profile to determine if there is evidence for redox-dependent cycling and fractionation of U within modern BSCs. (1) Beraldi-Campesi, H. et al. (2009) Geobiology, 7:348-359.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85812", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85813" } }
{"authors":"Scott Miller::Univ Wyoming--", "title":"H51N-1591: The High Variability of Hydrologic Response in Mountain Watersheds: Snowy Range, Wyoming", "abstract":"Three adjacent mountain streams that coalesce to form a single river have been monitored with a nested watershed design comprised of ten runoff stations for the past three years. Some of the stations are co-located on previous monitoring sites that allow for an extended period of record. Stage-discharge relationships have been built with high degrees of confidence at each station, and stream isotope data have been taken to better determine sources of water and fractionation of precipitation into runoff components. In addition to runoff observations we have multiple weather stations and use geophysical methods to investigate the subsurface and better characterize potential flow pathways and remote sensing and field methods to characterize the watersheds. From these data we have observed a high degree in variability in runoff characteristics among these sites, including significant differences in annual runoff, proportion of baseflow, rainfall/runoff efficiency, and hydrologic regime. Analyses of nested runoff data reveal longitudinal and seasonal changes in surface and subsurface flow, which allow us to identify the timing and location of groundwater contributions and channel transmission to regional aquifers. Differences among the watershed responses are augmented by precipitation, and we identify stream reaches that change from effluent to influent depending on timing and magnitude of runoff. We explored physical interpretations for the observed variability, including management, beetle impacts, and subsurface characteristics as inferred from geophysical data.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85813", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85815" } }
{"authors":"Melissa Kenney::University of Maryland College Park--Anthony Janetos::Boston University--Michael Gerst::University of Maryland College Park--Ainsley Lloyd::University of Maryland College Park--J. Wolfinger::University of Maryland College Park--Julian Reyes::Washington State University--Sarah Anderson::Washington State University--Richard Pouyat::U.S. Forest service--", "title":"GC11D-1062: A Prototype Indicators System for U.S. Climate Changes, Impacts, Vulnerabilities, and Responses", "abstract":"Indicators are observations or calculations that are used to systematically report or forecast social and biophysical conditions over time. When the purpose of indicators is to, in part, provide complex scientific information that is understood by non-scientists and included in decision processes, the choice of indicators requires a structured process that includes co-production among a range of actors, including scientists, decision-makers, and a range of stakeholders. Here we describe recommendations on a vision and a prototype created for an indicators system, we term the National Climate Indicators System (NCIS). The goal of the NCIS is to create a system of physical, natural, and societal indicators to communicate and inform decisions about climate changes, impacts, vulnerabilities, and responses. The process of generating the indicator system involved input from over 200 subject-matter experts. Organized into 13 teams, experts created conceptual models of their respective sectors to generate an initial recommended set of indicators. A subset of indicators, which could be immediately implemented, were prototyped for the U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP) a Federal program that coordinates and supports integration of global change research across the government. USGCRP reviewed the recommendations (Kenney et al., 2014) and prototypes provided by the scientific experts, and recently launched 14 indicators as proof-of-concept in support of a sustained National Climate Assessment and to solicit feedback from the users. Social science research is currently being undertaken in order to evaluate how well the prototype indicators communicate science to non-scientists, the usability of indicator system portal by scientists and decision-makers, and the development of information visualization guidelines to improve visual communication effectiveness. The goal of such efforts would be to provide input into the development of a more comprehensive USGCRP indicator set, building on recommendations from Kenney et al. (2014), and improve our understanding of the comprehension and use of indicators by non-scientists.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85815", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85816" } }
{"authors":"Thomas Benson::Stanford University--Gail Mahood::Stanford University--", "title":"V24C-04: The Oldest Known Caldera Associated with the Yellowstone Hotspot: New Geologic Mapping, Geochemistry, and 40Ar/39Ar Geochronology for the Northern McDermitt Volcanic Field, Northern Nevada and Southeastern Oregon", "abstract":"McDermitt Volcanic Field (MVF) of Nevada and Oregon is one of three major caldera centers associated with Mid-Miocene Steens/Columbia River flood basalts. Pioneering geologic mapping of MVF by Rytuba and McKee (1984) and subsequent work established four main ignimbrites within the field. Our new 40Ar/39Ar ages (FCT=28.02 Ma) are 16.41±0.02 (±2σ) Ma for Tuff of Oregon Canyon, 16.35±0.04 Ma for Tuff of Trout Creek Mountains, 16.30±0.04 Ma for Tuff of Long Ridge, and 15.56±0.08 Ma for Tuff of Whitehorse Creek. We have mapped two previously unrecognized overlapping calderas that we interpret as sources for Tuff of Oregon Canyon and Tuff of Trout Creek. These ~20-km diameter calderas lie north of the well-known McDermitt Caldera; a smaller 7-km caldera that formed on eruption of the Tuff of Whitehorse Creek is nested within them. Argon ages and geochemistry of alkali rhyolite lava domes in the northern MVF define two populations: ~16.6-16.3 Ma associated with the newly recognized calderas, and ~15.5-15.3 Ma outlining the margins of the younger Whitehorse Caldera. Consistent with both ignimbrites erupting from the same evolving magma system, the high-silica alkali rhyolite Tuff of Oregon Canyon lies on compositional trends defined by the Tuff of Trout Creek, which is zoned from a moderately crystal-rich high-silica alkali rhyolite to a strongly porphyritic low-silica alkali rhyolite. They both are distinguished from the Tuff of Long Ridge from McDermitt Caldera by their higher Zr/Rb, and relatively high FeO* concentrations distinguish all MVF ignimbrites from ignimbrites from the nearby High Rock Caldera Complex, where the oldest caldera formed on eruption of the Idaho Canyon Tuff at 16.38±0.02 Ma (Coble and Mahood, in review). The Tuff of Trout Creek rests conformably on the Tuff of Oregon Canyon west and southwest of the calderas, where they overlie a thick stack of Steens Basalt lavas. To the east and southeast the two ignimbrites are separated by as much as ~100m of Steens Basalt and ~150m of overlying trachyte lavas. Intrusion beneath the caldera of magma that continued to erupt elsewhere as mafic to intermediate lavas may have rejuvenated the Oregon Canyon magma chamber, which ultimately led to eruption of the Tuff of Trout Creek ~100 ky later.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85816", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85817" } }
{"authors":"James Mori::Kyoto University--", "title":"T43G-03: Slip to the Trench for Great Subduction Earthquakes", "abstract":"The 2011 Tohoku-oki earthquake had the largest ever recorded fault slip (40 to 60 meters) on the shallow portion of the subduction zone close to the trench. This large displacement was largely unexpected for this region and was mainly responsible for the very large and damaging tsunami along the northeast coast of Honshu. We investigate the possibility of large slip to the trench in great earthquakes for other subduction zones around the world. Since the trench region is generally far offshore, it is often difficult to resolve the amount of slip from onshore geodetic and strong-motion data. We use a variety of observations, including slip distribution models, aftershock locations, local coastal deformation, and tsunami heights to determine which events likely had large amounts of slip close to the trench. Tsunami earthquakes, such as 1992 Nicaragua and 2006 Java likely had large shallow slip. Some typical subduction earthquakes, such as 1968 Tokachi-oki and 2003 Tokachi-oki (located in regions north of the source area of the 2011 Tohoku-oki earthquake) likely did not. We will discuss possible factors that influence the slip distribution on the shallow area of subduction megathrusts. Using results from the Japan Trench Fast Drilling Project (JFAST) which sampled the fault in the region of large slip, we can begin to understand the conditions of very large fault slip, such as the characteristic fault zone material and level of friction on the fault.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85817", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85818" } }
{"authors":"Jason Polk::Western Kentucky University--Leslie North::Western Kentucky University--Bernard Strenecky::Western Kentucky University--", "title":"GC11G-1097: Building Partnerships and Research Collaborations to Address the Impacts of Arctic Change: The North Atlantic Climate Change Collaboration (NAC3)", "abstract":"Changes in Arctic warming influence the various atmospheric and oceanic patterns that drive Caribbean and mid-latitude climate events, including extreme events like drought, tornadoes, and flooding in Kentucky and the surrounding region. Recently, the establishment of the North Atlantic Climate Change Collaboration (NAC3) project at Western Kentucky University (WKU) in partnership with the University of Akureyri (UNAK), Iceland Arctic Cooperation Network (IACN), and Caribbean Community Climate Change Centre (CCCCC) provides a foundation from which to engage students in applied research from the local to global levels and more clearly understand the many tenets of climate change impacts in the Arctic within both a global and local community context. The NAC3 project encompasses many facets, including joint international courses, student internships, economic development, service learning, and applied research. In its first phase, the project has generated myriad outcomes and opportunities for bridging STEM disciplines with other fields to holistically and collaboratively address specific human-environmental issues falling under the broad umbrella of climate change. WKU and UNAK students desire interaction and exposure to other cultures and regions that are threatened by climate change and Iceland presents a unique opportunity to study influences such as oceanic processes, island economies, sustainable harvest of fisheries, and Arctic influences on climate change. The project aims to develop a model to bring partners together to conduct applied research on the complex subject of global environmental change, particularly in the Arctic, while simultaneously focusing on changing how we learn, develop community, and engage internationally to understand the impacts and find solutions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85818", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85819" } }
{"authors":"Jan Merka::University of Maryland Baltimore County--Charles Dolan::ADNET Systems Inc. Lanham--", "title":"IN33E-06: Use of Statistical Estimators as Virtual Observatory Search ParametersEnabling Access to Solar and Planetary Resources through the Virtual Observatory", "abstract":"Finding and retrieving space physics data is often a complicated task even for publicly available data sets: Thousands of relatively small and many large data sets are stored in various formats and, in the better case, accompanied by at least some documentation. Virtual Heliospheric and Magnetospheric Observatories (VHO and VMO) help researches by creating a single point of uniform discovery, access, and use of heliospheric (VHO) and magnetospheric (VMO) data. The VMO and VHO functionality relies on metadata expressed using the SPASE data model. This data model is developed by the SPASE Working Group which is currently the only international group supporting global data management for Solar and Space Physics. The two Virtual Observatories (VxOs) have initiated and lead a development of a SPASE-related standard named SPASE Query Language for provided a standard way of submitting queries and receiving results. The VMO and VHO use SPASE and SPASEQL for searches based on various criteria such as, for example, spatial location, time of observation, measurement type, parameter values, etc. The parameter values are represented by their statistical estimators calculated typically over 10-minute intervals: mean, median,  standard deviation, minimum, and maximum. The use of statistical estimators enables science driven data queries that simplify and shorten the effort to find where and/or how often the sought phenomenon is observed, as we will present.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85819", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85820" } }
{"authors":"Stephani Michelsen-Correa::University of Washington Seattle Campus--Hui Qian::Chang'an University--", "title":"B41B-0428: Local Alterations to the Nitrogen Cycle as Indicated by Tree Ring and Foliage Stable Isotopes, Xi’an China", "abstract":"China is currently experiencing some of the worst pollution problems on Earth. The increase in nitrogen deposition from industrial pollution sources over the past 30 years, has been substantial enough to increase foliar N uptake in plants growing in unfertilized fields and forests throughout China. The δ15N signature of foliage and soil have been used to infer changes in the biogeochemical cycling of N in the surrounding ecosystem. The current understanding of global trends in foliar δ15N however, is limited for the East Asia and Pacific region. Most of the research to date has been conducted in temperate and boreal forests of North America and Europe. In this study, two forested sites were sampled on the Loess Plateau, approximately 80km east of the city of Xi’an, Shaanxi Province, China. The study sites are 1 and 4km down wind of an industrial center including a large nitrogen fertilizer plant. Ecosystem components sampled include soil, forest floor, bole wood, and foliage. We use a combination of δ15N and δ13C of the tree rings, foliage, and soil as indicators of a changing nitrogen cycle and the physiological response of Chinese parasol trees (Firmiana simplex) over time. CN ratios at the study sites suggest that both forested stands are saturated with respect to N. A positive correlation between soil N and foliar δ15N is attributed to the leaching of N depleted in 15N with increasing N availability. Despite this positive correlation within the study area, overall foliar δ15N with a mean of -8.2‰ is low relative to foliage sampled in regions with lower atmospheric N inputs. Foliage and bole wood samples closest to the industrial center have higher δ13C, which is consistent with greater exposure to NOx emissions. While difference in δ15N of ecosystem components between sites is consistent with global trends, the absolute values for the whole study area are relatively low and attributed to N inputs from industrial sources depleted in 15N.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85820", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85821" } }
{"authors":"Tanu Malik::University of Chicago--Ian Foster::University of Chicago--Jonathan Goodall::University of Virginia Main Campus--Scott Peckham::University of Colorado--Joseph Baker::Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University--Michael Gurnis::California Institute of Technology--", "title":"IN21E-01: Personalized, Shareable Geoscience Dataspaces For Simplifying Data Management and Improving Reproducibility", "abstract":"Research activities are iterative, collaborative, and now data- and compute-intensive. Such research activities mean that even the many researchers who work in small laboratories must often create, acquire, manage, and manipulate much diverse data and keep track of complex software. They face difficult data and software management challenges, and data sharing and reproducibility are neglected. There is signficant federal investment in powerful cyberinfrastructure, in part to lesson the burden associated with modern data- and compute-intensive research. Similarly, geoscience communities are establishing research repositories to facilitate data preservation. Yet we observe a large fraction of the geoscience community continues to struggle with data and software management. The reason, studies suggest, is not lack of awareness but rather that tools do not adequately support time-consuming data life cycle activities. Through NSF/EarthCube-funded GeoDataspace project, we are building personalized, shareable dataspaces that help scientists connect their individual or research group efforts with the community at large. The dataspaces provide a light-weight multiplatform research data management system with tools for recording research activities in what we call geounits, so that a geoscientist can at any time snapshot and preserve, both for their own use and to share with the community, all data and code required to understand and reproduce a study. A software-as-a-service (SaaS) deployment model enhances usability of core components, and integration with widely used software systems. In this talk we will present the open-source GeoDataspace project and demonstrate how it is enabling reproducibility across geoscience domains of hydrology, space science, and modeling toolkits.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85821", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85823" } }
{"authors":"Charles Kroll::SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry--Timothy Stagnitta::SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry--Richard Vogel::Tufts University--", "title":"H13I-1709: Use of spot measurements to improve the estimation of low streamflow statistics.", "abstract":"Despite substantial efforts to improve the modeling and prediction of low streamflows at ungauged river sites, most models of low streamflow statistics create estimators with large errors. Often this is because the hydrogeologic characteristics of a watershed, which can strongly impact low streamflows, are difficult to characterize. One solution is to take a nominal number of streamflow measurements at an ungauged site to either estimate improved hydrogeologic indices or correlate with concurrent streamflow measurements at a nearby gauged river site. Past results have indicated that baseflow correlation performs better than regional regression when 4 or more streamflow measurements are available, even when the regional regression models are augmented by improved hydrogeologic indices. Here we revisit this issue within the 19,800 square mile Apalachicola-Chattahoochee-Flint watershed, a USGS WaterSMART region spanning Geogia, southeastern Alabama, and northwestern Florida. This study area is of particular interest because numerous watershed modeling analyses have previously been performed using gauged river sites within this basin. Initial results indicate that baseflow correlation can produce improved estimators when spot-measurements are available, but selection of an appropriate donor site is problematic, especially in regions with a small number of gauged river sites. Estimation of hydrogeologic indices do improve regional regression models, but these models are generally outperformed by baseflow correlation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85823", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85825" } }
{"authors":"Takato Takemura::Nihon University--Kyota Uemura::Nihon University--Yoshihiko Akiba::Nihon University--Maki Ota::Nihon University--", "title":"H23A-1567: In situ study of the effect of ground source heat pump on shallow ground-water quality in the late Pleistocene terrace area of Tokyo, Japan", "abstract":"The implementation of ground source heat pump (GSHP) systems has rapidly increased around the world, since they reduce carbon dioxide emissions and save electric energy. The GSHP system transfer heat into the geosphere zone when air conditioners are used to cool rooms or buildings. However, the effects of temperature increase on the quality of underground water has yet to be fully investigated. In order to reduce the risks of ground-water pollution by the installed GSHPs, it is important to evaluate the effect of temperature change on the ground-water quality. In this study, we installed a closed loop GSHP system on a heat exchange well along with a monitoring well drilled to measure ground-water quality and temperature. The monitoring well was drilled at 0.1cm away from the heat exchange well. We observed that changes of temperature in the heat exchange well affected the water quality, especially turbidity, in gravelly layer.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85825", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85826" } }
{"authors":"Junhyun Lee::Kyung Hee University--Ensang Lee::Kyung Hee University--Khan-Hyuk Kim::Kyung Hee University--Dong-Hun Lee::Kyung Hee University--Jaejin Lee::KASI Korea Astronomy and Space Science Institute--Harlan Spence::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--", "title":"SM21A-2483: Variations of energetic electrons associated with solar wind dynamic pressure enhancement in the outer radiation belt", "abstract":"Earth’s outer radiation belt varies dynamically under the variations of the solar wind. In this study, we investigated the variations of energetic electrons in the outer radiation belt caused by an enhancement of the solar wind dynamic pressure associated with an interplanetary shock using the measurements from the Van Allen Probes (VAP) satellites. The enhanced dynamic pressure lasted for about 24 hours, but magnetic storm was not occurred. The impact of the interplanetary shock on 13 April 2013 produced dipolarization of the magnetic field for a few minutes, which was simultaneously observed by VAP A and B moving in the nightside region. The enhancement of the electron fluxes with E < ~600 keV coincidentally occurred during the dipolarization. Later, drift echoes with energy dispersion and ULF-like modulations were observed. By comparing the measurements from VAP A and B we will discuss spatial and temporal characteristics of the enhancement of the energetic electron fluxes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85826", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85827" } }
{"authors":"Tao Sun::Chevron Energy Technology Company--", "title":"EP34B-08: Computer Simulations of Deltas with Varying Fluvial Input and Tidal Forcing", "abstract":"Deltas are important depositional systems because many large hydrocarbon reservoirs in the world today are found in delta deposits. Deltas form when water and sediments carried by fluvial channels are emptied to an open body of water, and form delta shaped deposits. Depending on the relative importance of the physical processes that controls the forming and the growth of deltas, deltas can often be classified into three different types, namely fluvial, tidal and wave dominated delta. Many previous works, using examples from modern systems, tank experiments, outcrops, and 2 and 3D seismic data sets, have studied the shape, morphology and stratigraphic architectures corresponding to each of the deltas’ types. However, few studies have focused on the change of these properties as a function of the relative change of the key controls, and most of the studies are qualitative. Here, using computer simulations, the dynamics of delta evolutions under an increasing amount of tidal influences are studied. The computer model used is fully based on the physics of fluid flow and sediment transport. In the model, tidal influences are taken into account by setting proper boundary conditions that varies both temporally and spatially. The model is capable of capturing many important natural geomorphic and sedimentary processes in fluvial and tidal systems, such as channel initiation, formation of channel levees, growth of mouth bars, bifurcation of channels around channel mouth bars, and channel avulsion. By systematically varying tidal range and fluvial input, the following properties are investigated quantitatively: (1) the presence and the form of tidal beds as a function of tidal range, (2) change of stratigraphic architecture of distributary channel mouth bars or tidal bars as tidal range changes, (3) the transport and sorting of different grainsizes and the overall facie distributions in the delta with different tidal ranges, and (4) the conditions and locations of mud drapes with different magnitude of tidal forcing.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85827", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85828" } }
{"authors":"Spencer Hatch::Dartmouth College--Christopher Chaston::University of California Berkeley--James Labelle::Dartmouth College--", "title":"SM23B-2566: FAST Observations of Enhanced Alfvénic Activity and Ion Upflow During Large Geomagnetic Storms", "abstract":"We present four years of FAST observations of Alfvénic field-aligned currents (FACs) coincident with 37 moderate to very strong ( Dst ≤ 50 nT) geomagnetic storms. Superposed epoch analysis of Alfvénic activity of storm periods demonstrates a sharp increase in the number of observed Alfvén waves, peaking near sudden commencement and then monotonically decreasing (in a statistical sense) through the main and recovery phases, returning within two or three days of storm commencement to background levels of Alfvénic activity. Stormtime Alfvén events are statistically more likely to be observed at lower latitudes relative to geomagnetically quiet periods, and are also more likely to occur at pre-midnight longitudes. For the same 37 storms, superposed epoch analysis of ion upflow measurements associated with each Alfvénic FAC not only shows an increase overall number of upflowing ions increases due to the increase in Alfvén activity, but also an increase in the average intensity of ion upflow; this suggests a nonlinear relationship between occurrence rates of Alfvén waves and upflow intensity. We explore one such possibility in terms of the magnitude of the current density and the intensity of upflowing ions related to Alfvénic FACs.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85828", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85829" } }
{"authors":"Hyunji Yoo::Yonsei University--", "title":"A11G-0154: Correlation between bioaerosol microbial community characteristics and real-time measurable environmental items: A case study from KORUS-AQ pre-campaign in Seoul, Korea", "abstract":"Due to global climate change, bioaerosols are more globally mixed with a more random manner. During a long-distance traveling dust event, the number of microbes significantly increases in bioaerosol, and the chance for bioaerosol to contain human pathogenic microorganisms may also increase. Recently, we have found that bioaerosol microbial community characteristics (copy number of total bacterial 16S rRNA genes, and population diversity and composition) are correlated with the quantitative detection of potential human pathogens. However, bioaerosol microbial community characteristics cannot be directly used in real-time monitoring because the DNA-based detection method requires at least couple days or a week to get reliable data. To circumvent this problem, a correlation of microbial community characteristics with real-time measurable environmental items (PM10, PM2.5, temperature, humidity, NOx, O3 etc.), if any, will be useful in frequent assessment of microbial risk from available real-time measured environmental data. In this work, we monitored bioaerosol microbial communities using a high-throughput DNA sequencing method (Mi-seq) during the KORUS-AQ (KoreaUS-Air Quality) pre-campaign (May to June, 2015) in Seoul, and investigated whether any correlation exists between the bioaerosol microbial community characteristics and the real-time measureable environmental items simultaneously attained during the pre-campaign period. At the pre-campaign site (Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul), bioaerosol samples were collected using high volume air sampler, and their 16S rRNA gene based bacterial communities were analyzed by Miseq sequencing and bioinformatics. Simultaneously, atmosphere environmental items were monitored at the same site. Using Decision Tree, a non-linear multi-variant correlation was observed between the bioaerosol microbial community characteristics and the real-time measured atmosphere chemistry data, and a rule induction was developed to assess bacterial community characteristics from the real-time measurable chemistry data. The findings suggest that it is promising to develop a new method in real-time assessing bioaerosol microbial risk from diverse real-time measured data including satellite and flight monitoring.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85829", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85830" } }
{"authors":"Dustin Villarreal::University of Houston--Alexander Robinson::University of Houston--Ilhomjon Oimahmadov::Earthquake Enginering and Seismology, Academy of the Republic of Tajikistan--Brian MacDonald::University of Houston--Barbara Carrapa::University of Arizona--Mustafo Gadoev::Earthquake Enginering and Seismology, Academy of the Republic of Tajikistan--", "title":"T21B-2825: Assessing Pre-Cenozoic Shortening of the Southern Pamir", "abstract":"An ongoing problem in understanding the evolution of the Himalayan-Tibetan Orogen is determining how much shortening and thickening of the crust occurred before the Cenozoic collision between India and Eurasia. Whereas previously-determined values for the timing and magnitude of internal shortening in the Pamir as a whole suggest >340 km of Cenozoic internal shortening and 150 km within the Southern Pamir alone (Burtman and Molnar, 1993), recent work indicates the magnitude of shortening may be much less. In the Southern Pamir, for example, shortening formerly-interpreted as a Cenozoic nappe structure, which accounted for approximately 100 km of the 150 km, has recently been shown to be a detachment fault bounding a Cenozoic gneiss dome (Stubner et al. 2013). Our study aims to address the timing and magnitude of shortening in the Southern Pamir. The Pamir has had a protracted history of deformation due to the accretion of Gondwana terranes and subsequent tectonism. A post accretion Jurassic carbonate platform within the Central and Southern Pamir provides an ideal strain marker for evaluating the magnitude of post-suturing deformation. Further, syn-tectonic terrigenous deposits associated with deformation of the Jurassic carbonates provide means of addressing the timing of their deformation through detrital zircon maximum depositional ages. Preliminary detrital zircon results from our work and other studies indicate shortening occurred during the Early to Middle Cretaceous, prior to the collision of India and Eurasia, rather than during the Cenozoic as previously interpreted. Further, our geologic field mapping and cross section analysis suggest post-Jurassic internal shortening in the Southern Pamir is ~7 km, much less than the 50 km previously suggested. Our results of this study indicate that internal upper crustal shortening in the Pamir is significantly less than previously proposed and is largely Cretaceous in age rather than Cenozoic.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85830", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85831" } }
{"authors":"Yoshiki Kubo::Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology--Marino Hiraoka::Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology--Takashi Gomi::Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology--Keisuke Nidaira::Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology--Yoshimi Uchiyama::Kanagawa Prefecture--", "title":"EP53B-1009: Tracing bed load sediment using PIT tags in a steep headwater channel.", "abstract":"Bed load transport in steep headwater channels is complex because of the particle size distribution, topography, channel roughness, and sediment supply from adjacent hillslope. We monitored movement bed load sediment using PIT tags in a steep headwater channel segments. Study area is located in 7.0ha Oobora-sawa observatory from 50km west of Tokyo metropolitan. Annual precipitation is 3000mm and mean temperature is 10°. Annual bed load sediment yields in the study catchment was from 6.5 to 7.6 t/ha/yr. Mean channel gradient is 24° with 0.5m low flow width. The channel is consisted by 0.2 to 1.6m interval of step-pool sequences. Based on pebble count method, D10, D50 and D90 of channel substrate were 8, 28 and 206mm respectively. We deployed 134 bed load tracers with five classes of diameter ranges (Class1:17.7, Class2:24.8, Class3:35.8, Class4:54.1 and Class5:83.8mm). Selected tracers represented from D20 to D77 of channel bed substrates. PIT tags (diameter 2mm, length 9mm and weight 0.1g) were placed into the particles by drilling and refilled with non-corrosive epoxy. We investigated the movement of bed load tracers every major storm event since February 2015. Channel morphology was measured using photographic survey and topographic model was developed using software of Surface from motion (PhotoScan). Mean bed load movement in the 5 storm event with 438 mm total and 33 mm maximum intensity was 168 mm. Then 51 mm of bed load movement occurred in 43 mm total and 16 mm intensity of rainfall. Recurrence interval of the two storm event was 1 and 4 year respectively. Receivable rates of bed load tracers was 70 and 74 % in the two events. Mobilized bed load (7 to 18%) deposited at cascade, pool and riffle, and among step clusters. Mobilized bed load tracers is rather random and we do not find any patterns for particle size for the movement and distance. Our field monitoring showed that bed load tracers were not mobilized for storm events with 10.5mm/h intensity of rainfall. The intermittency of movement of bed load was also observed in the sediment ponds at catchment outlets.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85831", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85832" } }
{"authors":"Nicholas Medina::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Pierre-Joseph Hatton::University of Michigan Ann Arbor CUNY Queens College--Jim Le Moine::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Knute Nadelhoffer::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--", "title":"B32C-04: Soil Organic Carbon Sources of Respired CO2 in a Mid-successional North Temperate Forest", "abstract":"Given that soil organic matter (SOM) is the largest global terrestrial carbon (C) pool, some fractions of which have turnover times of centuries to millennia, it is critical to understand the mechanisms by which higher net primary productivity (NPP) and higher litter inputs, in the future, as predicted by some models, might alter the potentials of forest soils to serve as long-term C sinks. Here, we use a 10-year-old site in the DIRT (Detritus Input and Removal Treatments) network of litter manipulations to compare plots in a forested, northern-temperate sandy soil that were subjected to double-leaf-litter additions (DL) and both root- and leaf-litter removals (no inputs, NI) to non-manipulated controls. Previous data show that rather than increasing soil organic carbon (SOC) stocks, plots receiving doubled litter inputs lose SOC at rates similar to losses in Control soils. To trace the source of extra mineralized SOC, we analyzed field CO2 effluxes for δ13C and characterized SOC of varying degrees of organo-mineral association with sequential density fractionations. Soils in DL plots respired significantly faster (p=0.095) and proportionally more (p=0.015) than control soils over the course of July, August, and October 2014. This suggests a greater fresh litter contribution to soil efflux in DL than in Control plots after 10 years of treatment. Preliminary data show that intermediate (1.85 - 2.4 g/mL) and dense (>2.4 g/mL) fractions are relatively larger in DL than in Control soils. This suggests that the addition C from doubled litter could be more rapidly transferred into those more dense fractions, or that higher litter inputs prime the decomposition of lighter particulate SOC forms, leading to a relative increase of the dense organo-mineral associations. Using δ13C values to parameterize a multi-source mixing model, we partition the fate of both fresh litter and partially-decomposed SOC and will present on the modeled relative contributions of various sources to field CO2 effluxes from diverse treatments. Our preliminary data and expected results may suggest important contributions from mineral-associated SOC, rather than simply from free SOC, to seasonal field soil respiration. Thus, with higher litterfall rates, C that similar forest soils sequester may exhibit shorter ecosystem-level residence times.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85832", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85833" } }
{"authors":"Temilola Fatoyinbo::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Marc Simard::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--David Lagomasino::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Seung-Kuk Lee::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Carl Trettin::US Forest Service Cordesville--Emanuelle Feliciano::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Matthew Hansen::University of Maryland--Poulsen John::Duke University--Viviana Zalles::University of Maryland College Park--", "title":"GC11B-1046: Mangrove Blue Carbon stocks and change estimation from PolInSAR, Lidar and High Resolution Stereo Imagery combined with Forest Cover change mapping", "abstract":"Mangroves and tidal wetlands have the highest carbon density among terrestrial ecosystems. Although they only represent 3 % of the total forest area (or 0.01 % of land area), C emissions from mangrove destruction alone at current rates could be equivalent to 10 % of carbon emissions from deforestation. One of the main challenges to implementing carbon mitigation projects is measuring carbon, efficiently, effectively, and safely. In mangroves especially, the extreme difficulty of the terrain has hindered the establishment of sufficient field plots needed to accurately measure carbon on the scale necessary to relate remotely sensed measurements with field measurements at accuracies required for REDD and other C trading mechanisms. In this presentation we will showcase the methodologies for, and the remote sensing products necessary to implement MRV (monitoring, reporting and verification) systems in Coastal Blue Carbon ecosystems. Specifically, we will present new methods to estimate aboveground biomass stocks and change in mangrove ecosystems using remotely sensed data from Interferometric SAR from the TanDEM-X mission, commercial airborne Lidar, High Resolution Stereo-imagery, and timeseries analysis of Landsat imagery in combination with intensive field measurements of above and belowground carbon stocks. Our research is based on the hypothesis that by combining field measurements, commercial airborne Lidar, optical and Pol-InSAR data, we are able to estimate Mangrove blue carbon storage with an error under 20% at the project level and permit the evaluation of UNFCCC mechanisms for the mitigation of carbon emissions from coastal ecosystems.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85833", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85834" } }
{"authors":"Christine Downs::University of South Florida--ReNae Nowicki::University of South Florida--Mark Rains::University of South Florida--Sarah Kruse::University of South Florida--", "title":"H21C-1395: Investigating Hydrogeologic Controls on Sandhill Wetlands in Covered Karst with 2D Resistivity and Ground Penetrating Radar", "abstract":"In west-central Florida, wetland and lake distribution is strongly controlled by karst landforms. Sandhill wetlands and lakes are sand-filled upland basins whose water levels are groundwater driven. Lake dimensions only reach wetland edges during extreme precipitation events. Current wetland classification schemes are inappropriate for identifying sandhill wetlands due to their unique hydrologic regime and ecologic expression. As a result, it is difficult to determine whether or not a wetland is impacted by groundwater pumping, development, and climate change. A better understanding of subsurface structures and how they control the hydrologic regime is necessary for development of an identification and monitoring protocol. Long-term studies record vegetation diversity and distribution, shallow ground water levels and surface water levels. The overall goals are to determine the hydrologic controls (groundwater, seepage, surface water inputs). Most recently a series of geophysical surveys was conducted at select sites in Hernando and Pasco County, Florida. Electrical resistivity and ground penetrating radar were employed to image sand-filled basins and the top of the limestone bedrock and stratigraphy of wetland slopes, respectively. The deepest extent of these sand-filled basins is generally reflected in topography as shallow depressions. Resistivity along inundated wetlands suggests the pools are surface expressions of the surficial aquifer. However, possible breaches in confining clay layers beneath topographic highs between depressions are seen in resistivity profiles as conductive anomalies and in GPR as interruptions in otherwise continuous horizons. These data occur at sites where unconfined and confined water levels are in agreement, suggesting communication between shallow and deep groundwater. Wetland plants are observed outside the historic wetland boundary at many sites, GPR profiles show near-surface layers dipping towards the wetlands at a shallower angle than the slope. Wetlands plants are often found where these layers are truncated by the slope suggesting seepage of unconfined aquifer and a new wetland boundary.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85834", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85835" } }
{"authors":"James Balamuta::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Jonathan Greenberg::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Bo Li::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Albert Man::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Qing Xu::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Zewei Xu::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--", "title":"GC11B-1043: Developing a generalized allometric equation for aboveground biomass estimation", "abstract":"A key potential uncertainty in estimating carbon stocks across multiple scales stems from the use of empirically calibrated allometric equations, which estimate aboveground biomass (AGB) from plant characteristics such as diameter at breast height (DBH) and/or height (H). The equations themselves contain significant and, at times, poorly characterized errors. Species-specific equations may be missing. Plant responses to their local biophysical environment may lead to spatially varying allometric relationships. The structural predictor may be difficult or impossible to measure accurately, particularly when derived from remote sensing data. All of these issues may lead to significant and spatially varying uncertainties in the estimation of AGB that are unexplored in the literature. We sought to quantify the errors in predicting AGB at the tree and plot level for vegetation plots in California. To accomplish this, we derived a generalized allometric equation (GAE) which we used to model the AGB on a full set of tree information such as DBH, H, taxonomy, and biophysical environment. The GAE was derived using published allometric equations in the GlobAllomeTree database. The equations were sparse in details about the error since authors provide the coefficient of determination (R2) and the sample size. A more realistic simulation of tree AGB should also contain the noise that was not captured by the allometric equation. We derived an empirically corrected variance estimate for the amount of noise to represent the errors in the real biomass. Also, we accounted for the hierarchical relationship between different species by treating each taxonomic level as a covariate nested within a higher taxonomic level (e.g. species < genus). This approach provides estimation under incomplete tree information (e.g. missing species) or blurred information (e.g. conjecture of species), plus the biophysical environment. The GAE allowed us to quantify contribution of each different covariate in estimating the AGB of trees. Lastly, we applied the GAE to an existing vegetation plot database - Forest Inventory and Analysis database - to derive per-tree and per-plot AGB estimations, their errors, and how much the error could be contributed to the original equations, the plant’s taxonomy, and their biophysical environment.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85835", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85836" } }
{"authors":"Michael Friedel::GNS Science--Massimo Buscema::University of Colorado Denver--Lucas Moreira::Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of Brasilia--Chris Daughney::GNS Science--", "title":"H13A-1489: Application of Data Fusion and Knowledge Extraction in Hydrogeology", "abstract":"Since the development of personal computers, the modeling of groundwater systems shifted from analytical equations to numerical models. Given the ill-posed nature and non-uniqueness of numerical groundwater models, the use of alternate data fusion and knowledge extraction paradigms is being explored to reduce uncertainty through improvements in the conceptualization and parameterization processes and boundary conditions. This presentation demonstrates the use of data fusion using joint-inverse, artificial adaptive system, and hybrid modeling techniques to assist with these challenges. Examples include using joint-inversion for coupled unsaturated zone and geothermal studies, using artificial adaptive systems in water-quality and groundwater recharge studies including subset selection, using hybrid solutions for remote mapping of surficial aquifers and landscape characteristics, and forecasting climate change.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85836", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85837" } }
{"authors":"Gregory Fleishman::New Jersey Institute of Technology--Alexey Kuznetsov::ISZF--", "title":"SH33C-08: Radio Emissions from Plasma with Electron Kappa-Distributions", "abstract":"Gregory Fleishman (New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, USA) Alexey Kuznetsov (Institute of Solar-Terrestrial Physics, Irkutsk, Russia),   Currently there is a concern about the ability of the classical thermal (Maxwellian) distribution to describe quasisteady-state plasma in the solar atmosphere, including active regions. In particular, other distributions have been proposed to better fit observations, for example, kappa-distributions. If present, these distributions will generate radio emissions with different observable properties compared with the classical gyroresonance (GR) or free–free emission, which implies a way of remotely detecting these kappa distributions in the radio observations. Here we present analytically derived GR and free–free emissivities and absorption coefficients for the kappa-distribution, and discuss their properties, which are in fact remarkably different from the classical Maxwellian plasma. In particular, the radio brightness temperature from a gyrolayer increases with the optical depth τ for kappa-distribution. This property has a remarkable consequence allowing a straightforward observational test: the GR radio emission from the non-Maxwellian distributions is supposed to be noticeably polarized even in the optically thick case, where the emission would have strictly zero polarization in the case of Maxwellian plasma. This offers a way of remote probing the plasma distribution in astrophysical sources, including solar active regions as a vivid example. In this report, we present analytical formulae and computer codes to calculate the emission parameters. We simulate the gyroresonance emission under the conditions typical of the solar active regions and compare the results for different electron distributions. We discuss the implications of our findings for interpretation of radio observations. This work was supported in part by NSF grants AGS-1250374 and AGS-1262772, NASA grant NNX14AC87G to New Jersey Institute of Technology and RFBR grants 15-02-01089, 15-02-03717, 15-02-03835, and 15-02-08028.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85837", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85838" } }
{"authors":"Manuela Tost::University of Auckland--Shane Cronin::University of Auckland--", "title":"V22B-03: The influence of regional extensional tectonic stress on the eruptive behaviour of subduction-zone volcanoes", "abstract":"Regional tectonic stress is considered a trigger mechanism for explosive volcanic activity, but the related mechanisms at depth are not well understood. The unique geological setting of Ruapehu, New Zealand, allows investigation on the effect of enhanced regional extensional crustal tension on the eruptive behaviour of subduction-zone volcanoes. The composite cone is located at the southwestern terminus of the Taupo Volcanic Zone, one of the most active silicic magma systems on Earth, which extends through the central part of New Zealand’s North Island. Rhyolitic caldera eruptions are limited to its central part where crustal extension is highest, whereas lower extension and additional dextral shear dominate in the southwestern and northeastern segments characterized by andesitic volcanism. South of Ruapehu, the intra-arc rift zone traverses into a compressional geological setting with updoming marine sequences dissected by reverse and normal faults. The current eruptive behaviour of Ruapehu is dominated by small-scaled vulcanian eruptions, but our studies indicate that subplinian to plinian eruptions have frequently occurred since ≥340 ka and were usually preceded by major rhyolitic caldera unrest in the Taupo Volcanic Zone. Pre-existing structures related to the NNW-SSE trending subduction-zone setting are thought to extend at depth and create preferred pathways for the silicic magma bodies, which may facilitate the development of large (>100 km3) dyke-like upper-crustal storage systems prior to major caldera activity. This may cause enhanced extensional stress throughout the entire intra-arc setting, including the Ruapehu area. During periods of caldera dormancy, the thick crust underlying the volcano and the enhanced dextral share rate likely impede ascent of larger andesitic magma bodies, and storage of andesitic melts dominantly occurs within small-scaled magma bodies at middle- to lower-crustal levels. During episodes of major caldera unrest, ascent and storage of voluminous rhyolitic magma bodies at upper crustal levels may cause the extensional stress to supercede the dextral shear rate in the Ruapehu area, facilitating ascent of larger andesitic magma bodies at depth, and changing the volcano’s eruptive behaviour from dominantly vulcanian to violently subplinian/plinian.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85838", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85839" } }
{"authors":"Matthew Irish::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Jason Schroeder::University of California Irvine--Andreas Beyersdorf::NASA Langley Research Center--Donald Blake::University of California Irvine--", "title":"A21A-0035: Quantifying Molecular Hydrogen Emissions and an Industrial Leakage Rate for the South Coast Air Basin of California", "abstract":"The poorly understood atmospheric budget and distribution of molecular hydrogen (H2) have invited further research since the discovery that emissions from a hydrogen-based economy could have negative impacts on the global climate system and stratospheric ozone. The burgeoning fuel cell electric vehicle industry in the South Coast Air Basin of California (SoCAB) presents an opportunity to observe and constrain urban anthropogenic H2 emissions. This work presents the first H2 emissions estimate for the SoCAB and calculates an upper limit for the current rate of leakage from production and distribution infrastructure within the region. A top-down method utilized whole air samples collected during the Student Airborne Research Program (SARP) onboard the NASA DC-8 research aircraft from 23-25 June 2015 to estimate H2 emissions from combustion and non-combustion sources. H2:carbon monoxide (CO) and H2:carbon dioxide ratios from airborne observations were compared with experimentally established ratios from pure combustion source ratios and scaled with the well-constrained CO emissions inventory to yield H2 emissions of 24.9 ± 3.6 Gg a-1 (1σ) from combustion engines and 8.2 ± 4.7 Gg a-1 from non-combustion sources. Total daily production of H2 in the SoCAB was compared with the top-down results to estimate an upper limit leakage rate (5%) where all emissions not accounted for by incomplete combustion in engines were assumed to be emitted from H2 infrastructure. For bottom-up validation, the NOAA Hybrid Single Particle Lagrangian Integrated Trajectory dispersion model was run iteratively with all known stationary sources in attempt to constrain emissions. While this investigation determined that H2 emissions from non-combustion sources in the SoCAB are likely significant, more in-depth analysis is required to better predict the atmospheric implications of a hydrogen economy.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85839", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85840" } }
{"authors":"Kerri Johnson::University of California Santa Cruz--Noah Finnegan::University of California Santa Barbara--", "title":"EP43C-01: Captures, Cutoffs, and Autogenic Drainage Basin Reorganization from Bedrock River Meandering in the Oregon Coast Range", "abstract":"Meandering bedrock channels in the Oregon Coast Range (OCR), USA, have lateral migration rates far in excess of vertical incision rates. Consequently, the sweeping of trunk streams through this landscape can locally exert a much stronger influence on tributary channel long profiles than far-field tectonic forcing of base-level. Here, we use LiDAR-data to explore the influence of lateral channel mobility on the evolution of tributaries to the Smith River, in the OCR. We focus on two processes that dramatically and instantaneously change tributary long profiles: 1) Capture of tributaries by growing meander bends, and 2) Meander bend neck cutoffs on the main-stem that leave tributaries disconnected from base-level lowering. We focus on these two types of events because they provide clear examples of autogenic drivers of landscape disequilibrium at the sub-watershed scale in a landscape that is commonly argued to reflect steady tectonic forcing of base-level. We show that tributary streams are significantly more likely to flow into the leading edge of meander bends, testifying to the repeated capture of tributaries by growing bends. Examples of eminent captures by migrating bends, and examples with large knick points along recently captured tributaries suggest that the autogenic capture of tributaries by growing bends is a fundamental cause of transience in tributary channels in this landscape. To demonstrate the influence of the process of meander bend neck cutoff on tributary long profile evolution, we compare the long profiles of 34 tributaries that were hung above the main-stem of the Smith River following neck cutoff events. These stagnated tributary channels typically exhibit large convexities that record ongoing lowering of the trunk stream. Measured heights of these hanging tributaries implies that the timescale of adjustment for tributaries following cutoff events is ~ 105-106 years. The timescale of adjustment of tributary channels following meander cutoff events is therefore comparable to or in excess of the time-scale of Pleistocene climate and sea-level variability. Our results therefore demonstrate that tributaries in the OCR are strongly overprinted by the effects of autogenic base-level changes triggered by meandering trunk streams.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85840", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85841" } }
{"authors":"James Lever::US Army Engineer Research and Development--Zoe Courville::CRREL--Laura Ray::Dartmouth College--Benjamin Walker::Dartmouth College--Steven Arcone::US Army Engineer Research and Development--", "title":"C11B-0756: Autonomous Rover for Polar GPR Surveys", "abstract":"We deployed Yeti, an 80-kg, 4WD battery-powered rover to conduct ground-penetrating radar (GPR) surveys over crevasse-ridden ice sheets in Antarctica and Greenland. The rover navigated using GPS waypoint following and had 3 – 4 hr endurance at 5 km/hr while towing 60 – 70 kg of GPR equipment. Yeti’s low ground pressure allowed it to cross thinly bridged crevasses without interrupting a survey. In Feb – Mar 2014, Yeti executed 23 autonomous GPR surveys covering 94 km of terrain on the ice transition to the main ice sheet in northwest Greenland. This was the first robotic effort directly to support manual crevasse surveys to map a safe route for vehicle travel, in this case a resupply traverse to Summit Station. Yeti towed a radar controller, 400 MHz antenna, GPS receiver and battery pack. Radar scan rate was 16 scans/m and pulse timing allowed good spatial resolution to about 20-m depth. The resulting data allowed us to map hundreds of subsurface crevasses and provide the results nightly to the manual survey team to compliment its efforts. We met our objectives: (a) to enhance operational efficiency of the concurrent manual surveys, and (b) to create a geo-referenced database of crevasse signatures to validate aerial- and satellite-based crevasse-mapping platforms. In Oct – Nov 2014, we deployed Yeti in Antarctica to conduct systematic GPR surveys across a crevasse-ridden section of the shear margin between the Ross and McMurdo ice shelves and thereby gain insight into its state of fracture and long-term stability. Yeti flawlessly executed a total of 613 km of autonomous GPR surveys at temperatures as low as – 33ºC. The rover towed a a radar controlling a 400 MHz and a 200 MHz antenna, the latter added to profile 160 m through the ice sheet. The main survey grid covered 5.7 km x 5.0 km, with survey lines at 50-m spacing oriented west-east across the Shear Zone (575 km total length). Yeti’s tracks normally deviated only 1 – 2 m from a straight line between the two end waypoints. Interpreted features include crevasses up to 16 m wide with snowbridges up to 10 m thick and at least the upper 16 m of stratified marine basal ice. These autonomous GPR surveys could not have been conducted safely using manual methods owing to the numerous, thinly bridged crevasses. Such systematic, repetitious measurements can enhance other Polar research projects.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85841", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85842" } }
{"authors":"Leslie North::Western Kentucky University--Jason Polk::Western Kentucky University--Bernard Strenecky::Western Kentucky University--", "title":"ED32A-08: Partnering International Universities to Enhance Climate Literacy through Interdisciplinary, Cross-Cultural Learning", "abstract":"The climate change phenomenon will present complex, far-reaching challenges and opportunities, which will require leaders well-versed in interdisciplinary learning and international understanding. In an effort to develop the next generation of future leaders prepared for these challenges and opportunities, faculty from Western Kentucky University (WKU) and the University of Akureyri (UNAK), Iceland partnered to co-teach a course in climate change science and communication in Iceland. Students from both Institutions participated in the course to further enhance the cross-learning opportunity presented to the students. The 11-day course stationed out of three cities in Iceland, including Reykjavík, Vik, and Akureyri, the Icelandic gateway to the Arctic. In addition to undertaking field experiences such as hiking on glaciers, exploring ice caves, and touring geothermal plants, the group also hosted forums to discuss climate change with members of the Icelandic community, and completed The $100 Solution™ service-learning projects. A culminating point of the study abroad experience was a presentation by the students to persons from the University of Akureyri and representatives from the neighboring Icelandic communities about what they had learned about climate change science and communication during their travels. Through this experience, students were able to share their knowledge, which in turn gave them a deeper understanding of the issues they were learning throughout the study abroad program. In short, the program combined interdisciplinary learning, service-learning, and international understanding toward the goal of preparing the leaders of tomorrow with the skills to address climate change challenges.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85842", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85843" } }
{"authors":"Ning Zeng::University of Maryland College Park--", "title":"B23G-0667: The changing CO2 seasonal cycle: past and future", "abstract":"A long-standing puzzle in the global carbon cycle is the increase in the amplitude of the seasonal cycle of atmospheric CO2 and its relation to long-term carbon sink. This increase likely reflects enhanced biological activity in the Northern Hemisphere. It has been hypothesized that vegetation growth may have been stimulated by higher concentrations of CO2 as well as warming in recent decades, and more recently, the intensification of agriculture due to the use of high-productivity cultivars, fertilizer use and irrigation has been identified as a missing driver. However, the state-of-the-art carbon cycle models do not agree on the relative roles of such mechanisms. Furthermore, even the simulation of the mean seasonal cycle may be problematic. Yet most models predict large changes in the CO2 seasonal amplitude in the future, up to 75% increase in the CMIP5 ensemble. We analzye and review the evidence and mechanisms of such changes, based on CO2 and satellite vegetation observations and the TRENDY and CMIP5 models. We argue that detail spatial patterns and temporal variability, aspects often ignored and less well constrained, may be a key in delineating the mechanisms and therefore enhancing our confidence in future projection of both seasonal cycle and mean sink.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85843", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85844" } }
{"authors":"Amirhossein Afrooz::Self Employed--", "title":"Climate Change Impact on Drought Severity at a Basin Scale", "abstract":"This paper assesses impact of climate change on drought severity in the Chenar Rahdar River basin, Fars, Iran. Mean monthly precipitation values in the period 1971-2000 of Chenar Rahdar River basin were used for the estimation of drought severity. These precipitation time series have been used for estimation of Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI) for multiple time scales (1-, 3-, 6-, 9-, and 12- months) for Chenar Rahdar River basin. The outputs of two Global Circulation Models HadCM3 and CGCM3 were applied for three socioeconomic scenarios, namely, SRES A1B, SRES A2 and SRES B2 for the assessment of climate change impact on droughts. The GCM outputs were downscaled to the Chenar Rahdar River basin of using a statistical methodology to estimate precipitation time series for three future periods 2011–2040 and 2041–2069 and 2070-100. A method has been proposed for the estimation of annual cumulative drought severity-time scale-frequency curves. These curves integrate the drought severity and frequency for various types of drought. The SPI time series and annual weighted cumulative drought severity were estimated and compared with the respective time series and values of the historical period 1970-2000. The results showed that the annual drought severity is increased for all hydrological areas and SPI time scales, with the socioeconomic scenario SRES A1B being the most extreme.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85844", "section":""} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85845" } }
{"authors":"Jong-Kyun Chung::KASI Korea Astronomy and Space Science Institute--", "title":"SA51A-2396: Statistical Analysis of Ionospheric Storms on GPS TEC measurements between 2000 and 2014 in mid-latitude", "abstract":"The ionospheric storms that may generate the spatial/temporal gradient or irregularities of electron densities are very interest phenomena for two reasons. First, they occur by the increasing solar EUV/X-ray fluxes as well as by the equatorward or poleward plasma transportations by the global changes of the neutral winds and electric fields responded to geomagnetic storms. Second, they have been the practical interests in the satellite navigations and radio communications, especially in the mid-latitudes of the dense population regions in these days though ionosphere in mid-latitudes is quiet compared with high and low latitudes. In this presentation, the statistical analysis of the occurrences of the ionospheric storms in Korea are presented. They are examined from Korea GPS TEC dataset between 2000 and 2014 over the full-solar cycle coverage. We examine the two super geomagnetic storms cases of 29-31 October 2003 and 8-10 November 2004 to discuss the possible physical mechanisms for ionospheric storm of positive and negative phases and their affection on GPS positioning. The parameters to define the ionospheric storms are suggested to increase our understanding of their physical characteristic and then to apply the practical cases.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85845", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85846" } }
{"authors":"Shijie Zhong::University of Colorado at Boulder--", "title":"DI11A-2577: Dynamic topography as constraints on stress and viscosity in the mantle and lithosphere", "abstract":"Mantle convection generates stress in the mantle and lithosphere. The lithosphere stress is responsible for localized deformation including seismic deformation at plate boundaries, and localized stress highs in lithosphere are also suggested to cause dynamically self-consistent generation of plate tectonics and continental lithosphere instability, as the stress exceeds a threshold or yield stress. Modeling load-induced deformation at oceanic islands (e.g., Hawaii) constrains lithospheric stress at 100-200 MPa in the plate interiors, leading to a lower limit on lithospheric yield stress (Zhong and Watts, 2013). However, convection-induced lithospheric stress is poorly understood, ranging from 500 MPa to tens of MPa as reported in mantle convection studies. The magnitude and distribution of lithospheric and mantle stress depend critically on buoyancy and viscosity, particularly the latter. Unfortunately, lithospheric and mantle viscosity is also poorly constrained. For example, the inferred lower mantle viscosity from post-glacial rebound and geoid modeling studies ranges from 1023 Pas to 1022 Pas (e.g., Mitrovica and Forte, 2004; Simons and Hager, 1996; Paulson et al., 2007). In addition to the stress, the lower mantle viscosity may also affect the time evolution of mantle structure including sinking rate of slabs and formation of the degree-2 mantle seismic structure. Therefore, it is important to develop independent constraints on mantle viscosity and convection-induced stress. In this study, I demonstrate that dynamic topography can be used to place first-order constraints on both lithospheric stress and mantle viscosity. For a given superadiabatic temperature difference across the mantle (e.g., 2500 K), a larger mantle viscosity (or a smaller Rayleigh number) leads to a larger lithospheric stress and a larger dynamic topography. To be consistent with the inferred dynamic topography, the lower mantle viscosity is constrained to be significantly smaller than 1023 Pas, and convection-induced lithospheric stress is unlikely to exceed 200 MPa (i.e., the yield stress for plate interiors). I will discuss the general implications of the results for mantle dynamics including dynamic generation of plate tectonics and the nature of mantle structures (i.e., slabs and plumes) as imaged seismically.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85846", "section":"Earth's Deep Interior"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85848" } }
{"authors":"Maria Laura Mazzino::University of Calgary--Christopher Cully::University of Calgary--Sylvie Benck::Center for Space Radiations Université Catholique de Louvain--Mathias Cyamukungu::Université Catholique de Louvain Center for Space Radiations--Stanislav Borisov::Center for Space Radiations Université Catholique de Louvain--Viviane Pierrard::Center for Space Radiations Belgian Institute for Space Aeronomy--", "title":"SM21B-2514: Investigation of Energetic Particle Precipitation using the Array for Broadband Observations of VLF/ELF Emissions (ABOVE) and the Energetic Particle Telescope (EPT)", "abstract":"Energetic Electron Precipitation (EEP) is an important loss mechanism for electrons in the radiation belts and its dynamics are still not well understood. The Array for Broadband Observations of VLF/ELF Emissions (ABOVE) is a ground-based array positioned near other existing ground-based instrumentation, covering relevant latitudes and longitudes across Midwest Canada. One of the main objectives of ABOVE is to observe energetic particle precipitation by monitoring the amplitude and phase of artificial VLF transmitters at distant locations. The Energetic Particle Telescope (EPT) is a state-of-the-art instrument on the Proba-V satellite, designed for measurements of the charged particle radiation environment in space, which allows us to quantify the loss of energetic electrons in the radiation belts and correlate it to the EEP observations by ABOVE. We analyze periods of time in 2015 when the geomagnetic activity is high and the amplitude and phase variation of waves detected by ABOVE indicate precipitation of energetic electrons into the ionosphere, and correlate them with electron flux decreases measured by EPT.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85848", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85849" } }
{"authors":"Luciano Iess::Univ. La Sapienza--", "title":"P21B-07: The Interior of Enceladus from Gravity and Topography", "abstract":"The combination of gravity and topography has been the method of choice to obtain quantitative information on the interior of Enceladus, but its application was challenging because of the small mass of the moon and the short gravitational interaction time with the Cassini spacecraft. The main observable quantity used in the estimation of the gravity field was the spacecraft range rate, measured by the antennas of NASA’s Deep Space Network to an accuracy of about 0.03 mm/s (at 60 s integration time). In spite of these challenges and thanks to the careful design of three gravity flybys, Cassini was able to catch the essential features of Enceladus’s gravity field, in particular to estimate its quadrupole and detect the sought-for hemispherical asymmetry [1]. Crucial for the correct fit of the Doppler data was the inclusion in the dynamical model of the drag acceleration from the plume’s neutral particles. Although the largest quadrupole coefficients indicate only a mild deviation from hydrostatic equilibrium (J2/C22=3.55±0.05), a reliable determination of the MOIF uses J3 to separate the hydrostatic and non-hydrostatic components of the quadrupole field. The application of this method results in a MOIF (0.336) compatible with a differentiated structure. (An admittance analysis leads to a similar value.) The magnitude and the sign of J3 indicate that the gravity anomaly associated to the striking topographic depression (-1 km) in the southern polar regions is largely compensated by denser material at depth. The obvious (but not the only) interpretation points to a liquid water mass, denser than the surrounding ice and sandwiched between the ice shell and the rocky core. The gravity field and the topography provide also rough estimate of the size of the water mass and the depth at which it is located. Starting from the consideration that the hydrostatic J2/C22 ratio for a fast rotator like Enceladus is about 3.25 and not 10/3, a recent work [2] offers some adjustments to this picture. [1] L. Iess, D.J. Stevenson, et al.: “The Gravity Field and Interior Structure of Enceladus”, Science, 344, 78-80 (2014) DOI: 10.1126/science.1250551 [2] W.B. McKinnon: “Effect of Enceladus’s rapid synchronous spin on interpretation of Cassini gravity”, GRL, 42, 2137–2143 (2015) DOI:10.1002/2015GL063384", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85849", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85850" } }
{"authors":"Andrew Schroth::University of Vermont--", "title":"B53G-0659: Iron, manganese and phosphorus partitioning during high flow events: impacts of land cover and seasonality", "abstract":"Metals and phosphorous are essential micro and macronutrients in aquatic ecosystems, and redox sensitive colloidal and particulate metal (oxy)hydroxide phases can be particularly reactive carriers of solid phase P, as well as other nutrients and/or pollutants in riverine chemical loads. High flow events driven by storms and/or snow or glacial melt often dominate the annual load of such constituents, yet remain poorly understood from a biogeochemical perspective. Our research examines the biogeochemical nature of riverine metal and P loads during targeted high flow events to determine to what extent, and under what environmental conditions, are the concentration and biogeochemical composition of riverine loads of P, Fe, and Mn disproportionately high and relatively reactive v. inert. We present a suite of biogeochemical data derived from water and suspended sediment samples that were collected during these events in multiple catchments and over different seasons within the hydrologic year. We examine the size partitioning (particulate, colloidal, ‘truly dissolved’) of riverine Fe, Mn, and P during events in glaciated, boreal-forested, and agriculturalized catchments of Vermont and Alaska. Suspended sediment loads are also characterized by relative redox sensitivity to examine the potential reactivity of Fe, Mn, and P in sediment transported during particular events. We demonstrate that metal and P concentration, size partitioning, and redox sensitivity differs both seasonally and by land cover, which is due to different source environments and flow paths that are preferentially activated during high discharge. The conceptual model herein developed is critical to understanding the biogeochemical nature of event-based riverine loads, and how this could evolve with changing frequency and severity of high flow events or land cover associated with climate change and landscape management.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85850", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85851" } }
{"authors":"Lindsey Heagy::University of British Columbia--Rowan Cockett::University of British Columbia--Seogi Kang::University of British Columbia--Gudni Rosenkjaer::University of British Columbia--Doug Oldenburg::University of British Columbia--", "title":"GP24A-03: simpegEM: An open-source resource for simulation and parameter estimation problems in electromagnetic geophysics", "abstract":"A large suite of problems in applied geophysics can be tackled by simulating and inverting electromagnetic (EM) data. Problems can be treated in the time- or frequency-domain, sources can be magnetic or electric and either natural or controlled, techniques such as primary-secondary may be employed and different problem dimensionalities, including 1D, 2D and 3D, may be considered. To address the inverse problem, derivatives of each of these element must be readily accessible so they may be composed to form the sensitivity for the approach taken. For many applications, efficient algorithms have been designed and implemented. However, inconsistencies between implementations of different problem-types and modeling techniques often limits extensibility and interoperability, particularly when addressing the inverse problem. Building on top of the open-source simulation and gradient based parameter estimation framework, SimPEG ( http://simpeg.xyz ), we have developed simpegEM to be a modular framework for geophysical problems in electromagnetics. The SimPEG implementation in Python provides finite-volume discretizations for both structured and semi-structured meshes, along with machinery for the inversion, including optimization and regularization routines. The elements of the EM simulation, including the formulation of Maxwell’s equations and definitions of the sources and receivers as well as their derivatives are implemented in a modular, object-oriented manner. This structure and organization of the code allow elements to be readily interchanged and extensions made.  In this presentation, we discuss an example with steel-cased wells. Steel is highly conductive, has a significant magnetic permeability and is very thin compared to its length, making it a challenging structure to model. Using the open-source frameworks of SimPEG and simpegEM, we solve this using a primary-secondary approach that employs multiple formulations of Maxwell’s equations and both a 2D cylindrically symmetric mesh and a 3D tensor mesh. We explore results from these numerical experiments and discuss our goals for the ongoing construction of a platform to supports a community of researchers using EM geophysical simulations and inversions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85851", "section":"Geomagnetism and Paleomagnetism"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85852" } }
{"authors":"Xu Chu::Yale University--Jay Ague::Yale University Yale University--", "title":"V13A-3092: A new statistical analysis of rare earth element diffusion data in garnet", "abstract":"The incorporation of rare earth elements (REE) in garnet, Sm and Lu in particular, links garnet chemical zoning to absolute age determinations. The application of REE-based geochronology depends critically on the diffusion behaviors of the parent and daughter isotopes. Previous experimental studies on REE diffusion in garnet, however, exhibit significant discrepancies that impact interpretations of garnet Sm/Nd and Lu/Hf ages. We present a new statistical framework to analyze diffusion data for REE using an Arrhenius relationship that accounts for oxygen fugacity, cation radius and garnet unit-cell dimensions [1]. Our approach is based on Bayesian statistics and is implemented by the Markov chain Monte Carlo method. A similar approach has been recently applied to model diffusion of divalent cations in garnet [2]. The analysis incorporates recent data [3] in addition to the data compilation in ref. [1]. We also include the inter-run bias that helps reconcile the discrepancies among data sets. This additional term estimates the reproducibility and other experimental variabilities not explicitly incorporated in the Arrhenius relationship [2] (e.g., compositional dependence [3] and water content). The fitted Arrhenius relationships are consistent with the models in ref. [3], as well as refs. [1]&[4] at high temperatures. Down-temperature extrapolation leads to >0.5 order of magnitude faster diffusion coefficients than in refs. [1]&[4] at <750 °C. The predicted diffusion coefficients are significantly slower than ref. [5]. The fast diffusion [5] was supported by a field test of the Pikwitonei Granulite—the garnet Sm/Nd age postdates the metamorphic peak (750 °C) by ~30 Myr [6], suggesting considerable resetting of the Sm/Nd system during cooling. However, the Pikwitonei Granulite is a recently recognized UHT terrane with peak temperature exceeding 900 °C [7]. The revised closure temperature (~730 °C) is consistent with our new diffusion model. [1] Carlson (2012) Am Mineral 97 1598–1618. [2] Chu & Ague (2015) Contrib Mineral Petrol, in press. [3] Bloch et al. (2015) Contrib Mineral Petrol 169 1–18. [4] Van Orman et al. (2002) Contrib Mineral Petrol 142 416–424. [5] Tirone et al. (2005) GCA 69 2385–2398. [6] Mezger et al. (1992) EPSL 113 397–409. [7] Kooijman et al. (2012) J Metamorph Geol 30 397–412.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85852", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85853" } }
{"authors":"Zelalem Mekonnen::University of California Los Angeles--Mekonnen Gebremichael::University of California Los Angeles--Solomon Seyoum Demissie::University of California Los Angeles--", "title":"H51H-1491: Characterizing water resources of the Nile Basin using remotely sensed data", "abstract":"The Nile is one of the largest river basin in the world with a rich biodiversity as well supporting the lives of 450 million people residing within the 11 riparian countries. This vital resource is under a growing stress due to population growth, rapid development and climate change. In this work, we explore the use of the latest various remote sensing products to capture the water resource of the basin: rainfall from GPM and TRMM, soil moisture from SMAP and SMOS, evapotranspiration from MODIS and EUMETSAT LSA-SAF, and total water storage variations from GRACE. The satellite estimates were supplemented and checked by ground measurements whenever possible. Our results show that spatiotemporal variations of the basin’s water resources characteristics are well captured by remote sensing products rather than the scarce point measurements that currently exist. Several aspects of our results will be presented and discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85853", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85854" } }
{"authors":"Jeremy Lichstein::University of Florida--Tao Zhang::University of Florida--Ensheng Weng::Princeton University--Caroline Farrior::National Institute for Mathematical and Biological Synthesis--Ray Dybzinski::Princeton University Loyola University Chicago--Richard Birdsey::USDA Forest Service Northern Research Statiuon--Stephen Pacala::Princeton University--", "title":"B51K-06: Competition for light and water increases tree carbon allocation to fine roots and leaves in a next-generation dynamic vegetation model", "abstract":"The response of the terrestrial carbon (C) cycle to climate change is a key uncertainty in land models. An important component of this uncertainty concerns plant functional diversity, which is typically represented in land models by ~10 functional types (PFTs) with fixed traits. However, few land models include the individual-level competitive mechanisms that largely determine how plant functional traits are distributed in time and space in real ecosystems. We have developed a new land model that represents height-structured competition for light with a simple canopy space-filling algorithm, the perfect plasticity approximation (PPA). The new land model, LM3-PPA, allows for an arbitrary number of PFTs (or ‘species’) whose spatial-temporal distributions are determined by the outcome of competition for light and water. We performed experiments with a modified version of LM3-PPA in 10 eastern U.S. grid cells and across simulated precipitation gradients to determine how competition for light and water affects tree C allocation to leaves, fine roots, and wood across climate gradients and in response to episodic drought. We studied the performance of 16 allocational types (‘species’) in monoculture and in competition with each other to determine the competitively-optimal, NPP-maximizing, and biomass-maximizing C allocation strategy under different environmental conditions.   Under chronically moist conditions, competitively-optimal, NPP-maximizing, and biomass-maximizing trees all had similar C allocation. However, under chronically dry conditions, competitively-optimal trees allocated more C to both fine roots and leaves, and less C to wood, compared to NPP- or biomass-maximizing strategies. When subject to episodic drought, the most drought-tolerant allocational strategies had relatively low allocation to leaves (and thus low leaf area and low water demand). Thus, the “over-investment” in leaves that results from resource competition increases the vulnerability of forests to drought in the current version of LM3-PPA, which allows for individual-level plasticity in tree crown shapes but not in plant C-allocation strategy. Our results imply that land model predictions may depend strongly not only on trait variation across species or PFTs, but also on individual plasticity in traits.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85854", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85855" } }
{"authors":"Kevin Barrett::University of Wisconsin Madison--Soo Hyun Kim::University of Wisconsin Madison--Sara Hotchkiss::University of Wisconsin Madison--", "title":"PP31A-2208: A Record of Moisture History in Hawaii since the Arrival of Humans Inferred from Testate Amoebae and Cladocera Fossils Preserved in Bog Sediments", "abstract":"Around AD 800, Polynesians arrived on the Hawaiian Islands where they expanded and intensified distinct agricultural practices in the islands’ wet and dry regions. Dryland farming productivity in particular would have been sensitive to atmospheric rearrangements of the ENSO and PDO systems that affect rainfall in Hawaii. The few detailed terrestrial paleoclimate records in Hawaii are mainly derived from vegetation proxies (e.g. pollen, seeds, fruits, and plant biomarkers) which are heavily influenced by widespread landscape modification following human arrival. Here we present initial results of an independent paleomoisture proxy: fossil remains of moisture-sensitive testate amoebae (Protozoa: Rhizopoda) and cladocera (water fleas) preserved in continuous bog sediments on Kohala Volcano uplsope of the ancient Kohala agricultural field system, one of the largest dryland field systems in Hawaii. Hydrologic conditions inferred from testate amoebae and cladoceran fossil assemblages correlate with observed decadal moisture regimes in Hawaii and state changes of the PDO system during the last century. Testate ameoabe and cladoceran fossils in older sediments reveal an alternating history of very wet, lake-forming conditions on the bog surface to periods when bog soils were much drier than today's, demonstrating that this method can be paired with vegetation proxies to provide a better understanding of hydroclimate variability in prehistoric Hawaii.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85855", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85856" } }
{"authors":"Nguyen Thi KIM Oanh::Asian Institute of Technology--Hai Van Huynh::Asian Institute of Technology--Eri Saikawa::Emory University--", "title":"A21A-0036: Comparative Analysis of Passenger Traffic Fleets in Asian Cities: Technology, Driving Activities, and Emission", "abstract":"The road transport sector is the major emission source of toxic air pollutants and greenhouse gases (GHGs) in large Asian cities. This paper comparatively analyzed on-road passenger traffic fleets (cars, buses, taxis, motorcycles), using local data collected in cities of Bangkok (BKK), Kathmandu, Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC), and Yangon. Surveys were done in 2010-2014 to obtain information on vehicle technology, driving activities (speed, distance, number, and types of starts), traffic density, and fuel characteristics. Large shares of pre-Euro vehicles were still observed, especially for public buses. The most advanced technology was Euro4, which was observed in small shares (<5%) of the personal car fleets in BKK, HCMC, and Yangon. Euro3 was generally the most advanced technology found in other fleets in these cities. Motorcycles (MC) was the most dominant fleet in all cities, except in Yangon, where they were not allowed. Low vehicle speeds, mainly below 25 km/h, were observed for all vehicle types, indicating traffic jams. Natural gas and LPG had considerable shares in BKK and Yangon while for other cities diesel and gasoline were still the two major fuels used in transportation. Running emission factors (EF) of buses and taxis in Kathmandu were considerably higher than other cities due to its hilly topography, low speeds, high mileage, and less advanced vehicle technologies. The number of passenger vehicles per 1000 people were 400-500 in HCMC and Hanoi (mainly by MC) and in BKK (also by cars), moderate in Kathmandu (200) and the lowest in Yangon (40) because of the MC ban. Annual emissions of the passenger fleets were calculated for each city using the International Vehicle Emission (IVE) for 14 species. BC and OC emissions were estimated using their fractions of PM10 emission. Annual emission per capita of toxic air pollutants and GHGs was analyzed. For example, the emission in kg/year/person for CO, VOC, NOx and PM10 in these cities was 24-150 for CO, 0.9-23 for VOC, 2.1-8.2 for NOx and 0.2-1.1 for PM10. The highest per capita emissions of CO and VOC were found for HCMC and the lowest for Yangon, which showed the influence of MC fleet. The per capita emission of Kathmandu was ranked second among the cities. Our results were also analyzed in comparison with the per capita emission estimated for other Asian cities.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85856", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85857" } }
{"authors":"Zhigang Peng::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--Jing Wu::Institute of Geology and Geophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Dongdong Yao::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--LU LI::Institute of Geophysics, China Eathquake Administration--Xiaofeng Meng::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--Baoshan Wang::IGP Institute of Geophysics, China Earthquake Administration--Weijun Wang::IES Institute of Earthquake Science, China Earthquake Administration--Chenyu Li::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--", "title":"S41D-08: Systematic Detections of Early Aftershocks and Remotely Triggered Seismicity in China Following the 2015 Mw7.8 Gorkha, Nepal earthquake", "abstract":"The 2015/04/25 Mw7.8 Gorkha, Nepal earthquake occurred beneath the central portion of the Himalayan Frontal Thrust Fault. The mainshock was followed by numerous aftershocks near its epicentral region, as well as many earthquakes at various distances in China. Small to moderate-size earthquakes in Chongqing (~2500 km) and around Fangshan Pluton near Beijing (~3500 km) coincided with the arrivals of surface wave train, suggesting that they were likely triggered by dynamic stresses from the passing surface waves. 3 hours later, a M5.8 normal-faulting earthquake in Southern Tibet. Because of their close distances (within two fault-rupture lengths), it is not clear whether the M5.8 Tibetan event is triggered by static or dynamic stresses. Here we conduct a systematic detection of microseismicity in Nepal and Southern Tibet around the Nepal mainshock. We use earthquakes listed in the Advance National Seismic Network (ANSS) and China Earthquake Network Center (CENC) catalogs as templates, and scan through continuous waveform data within 700 km of the Nepal mainshock to detect additional smaller events that were not listed in these catalogs. As was done before, we apply a 0.5 to 8 Hz band-pass filter to both the template and continuous waveform data, and detect events with mean cross-correlation (CC) values that are at least 12 times larger than the daily median absolute deviation (MAD) values. Overall we have detected 5 times more aftershocks, as well as more than 80 uncatalogued events in Southern Tibet near the epicentral region of the M5.8 event. We also compute the dynamic and static stress changes on the two nodal planes of the M5.8 event. While we cannot completely rule out the influence of static stress change (because the M5.8 event is in the positive Coulomb stress change region), the amplitude of the dynamic stress change is several times larger than the static stress change, suggesting that this event is possibly triggered by dynamic stress changes (albeit with some time delays). The early aftershocks show systematic along-strike migrations, similar to other recently studied aftershock sequences. Our next step is to extend the same analysis to longer time period before and after the mainshock to detect potential foreshocks and investigate longer-time evolutions of seismicity in Nepal.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85857", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85858" } }
{"authors":"Thomas Harter::University of California Davis--Kristin Dzurella::University of California Davis--Andrew Bell::University of California Davis--Georgios Kourakos::University of California Davis--", "title":"H11F-1421: Field Scale Groundwater Nitrate Loading Model for the Central Valley, California, 1945-Current", "abstract":"Anthropogenic groundwater nitrate contamination in the Central Valley aquifer system, California, is widespread, with over 40% of domestic wells in some counties exceeding drinking water standards. Sources of groundwater nitrate include leaky municipal wastewater systems, municipal wastewater recharge, onsite wastewater treatment (septic) systems, atmospheric nitrogen deposition, animal farming, application of organic waste materials (sludge, biosolids, animal manure) to agricultural lands, and synthetic fertilizer. At the site or field scale, nitrogen inputs to the landscape are balanced by plant nitrogen uptake and harvest, atmospheric nitrogen losses, surface runoff of nitrogen, soil nitrogen storage changes, and leaching to groundwater. Irrigated agriculture is a dominant player in the Central Valley nitrogen cycle: The largest nitrogen fluxes are synthetic fertilizer and animal manure applications to cropland, crop nitrogen uptake, and groundwater nitrogen losses. We construct a historic field/parcel scale groundwater nitrogen loading model distinguishing urban and residential areas, individual animal farming areas, leaky wastewater lagoons, and approximately 50 different categories of agricultural crops. For non-agricultural landuses, groundwater nitrate loading is based on reported leaching values, animal population, and human population. For cropland, groundwater nitrate loading is computed from mass balance, taking into account diverse and historically changing management practices between different crops. Groundwater nitrate loading is estimated for 1945 to current. Significant increases in groundwater nitrate loading are associated with the expansion of synthetic fertilizer use in the 1950s to 1970s. Nitrate loading from synthetic fertilizer use has stagnated over the past 20 years due to improvements in nutrient use efficiency. However, an unbroken 60 year exponential increase in dairy production until the late 2000s has significantly impacted the nitrogen imbalance and is a significant threat to future groundwater quality in the Central Valley system. The model provides the basis for evaluating future planning scenarios to develop and assess long-term solutions for sustainable groundwater quality management.Anthropogenic groundwater nitrate contamination in the Central Valley aquifer system, California, is widespread, with over 40% of domestic wells in some counties exceeding drinking water standards. Sources of groundwater nitrate include leaky municipal wastewater systems, municipal wastewater recharge, onsite wastewater treatment (septic) systems, atmospheric nitrogen deposition, animal farming, application of organic waste materials (sludge, biosolids, animal manure) to agricultural lands, and synthetic fertilizer. At the site or field scale, nitrogen inputs to the landscape are balanced by plant nitrogen uptake and harvest, atmospheric nitrogen losses, surface runoff of nitrogen, soil nitrogen storage changes, and leaching to groundwater. Irrigated agriculture is a dominant player in the Central Valley nitrogen cycle: The largest nitrogen fluxes are synthetic fertilizer and animal manure applications to cropland, crop nitrogen uptake, and groundwater nitrogen losses. We construct a historic field/parcel scale groundwater nitrogen loading model distringuishing urban and residential areas, individual animal farming areas, leaky wastewater lagoons, and approximately 50 different categories of agricultural crops. For non-agricultural landuses, groundwater nitrate loading is based on reported leaching values, animal population, and human population. For cropland, groundwater nitrate loading is computed from mass balance, taking into account diverse and historically changing management practices between different crops. Groundwater nitrate loading is estimated for 1945 to current. Significant increases in groundwater nitrate loading are associated with the expansion of synthetic fertilizer use in the 1950s to 1970s. Nitrate loading from synthetic fertilizer use has stagnated over the past 20 years due to improvements in nutrient use efficiency. However, an unbroken 60 year exponential increase in dairy production until the late 2000s has significantly impacted the nitrogen imbalance and is a significant threat to future groundwater quality in the Central Valley system. The model provides the basis for evaluating future planning scenarios to develop and assess long-term solutions for sustainable groundwater quality management.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85858", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85860" } }
{"authors":"Dale Chayes::LDEO/Columbia University--Val Schmidt::Center for Coastal and Ocean Mapping Joint Hydrographic Center--", "title":"C43C-0817: An attempt at multibeam imaging of laboratory sea ice", "abstract":"Sea ice was grown in a wave tank at the Hamburgische Schiffbau-Versuchsanstalt GmbH (HSVA) in Hamburg, Germany from December 12–20, 2013 as part of an EU-funded effort to understand the behavior of crude oil under sea ice. As an add-on to that experiment, we borrowed a Teledyne ODOM MB1 multibeam sonar that works in the frequency range from 170 to 220 kHz, mounted it on a moveable trolly, and collected beamformed and time series data with it looking upward at sea ice grown under various conditions. The water depth between the sonar transducer and the bottom of the sea ice was shallower than expected so the sonar was operating in the vicinity of the near field boundary. The experimental setup, data processing methods, and results will be presented in this poster.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85860", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85863" } }
{"authors":"Robert Chen::Columbia University--Marc Levy::Columbia University--Alexander de Sherbinin::Columbia University--Alex Fischer::Columbia University--", "title":"PA53B-02: Designing the Monitoring of Water-Related Sustainable Development Goals Based on Value of Information", "abstract":"The proposed Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) represent an unprecedented international commitment to collective action and targeted interventions at global, regional, and national scales. Existing monitoring and data infrastructures are inadequate for producing the variety of environmental and socioeconomic information needed to ensure efficient and effective outcomes across the range of interlinked SDGs and targets. The scientific community needs to take a lead in developing new tools and approaches that, at reasonable cost, provide monitoring data of sufficient quality and spatial and temporal coverage to support informed decision making by diverse stakeholders. The expanded SDGs related to water offer the opportunity to explore potential new monitoring approaches and data system architectures in a key sector, building on existing water monitoring capabilities and incorporating new technologies and methods. Since additional investments in monitoring will undoubtedly be limited, it is important to assess carefully the value of information produced by different options and their associated risks and tradeoffs. We review here the existing set of water monitoring systems, known gaps and limitations, stakeholder inputs on data needs, and the potential value of information in light of alternative water sector interventions. Of particular interest are opportunities to share investments in monitoring across sectors and stakeholders (e.g., public and private entities) and to identify where incremental improvements in water monitoring could have significant benefits for other SDGs (e.g., related to health, energy, agriculture, and climate change). Value of information is also driven by the numbers of people affected by decisions or able to take advantage of improved data, which implies the need not only to collect and archive data, but also to invest in making data accessible and usable to diverse and geographically dispersed users.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85863", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85864" } }
{"authors":"Veerabhadran Ramanathan::University of California San Diego--", "title":"U13A-04: The Role of Religious and Scientific Leaders in Bringing Awareness to the Urgency of Climate Change.", "abstract":"The release of the Encyclical by Pope Francis has opened a powerful new venue to bring forth the urgency of climate change to the public. The background work that preceded the encyclical was several years in the making. The Church has its own Science Academy, known as the Pontifical Academy of Sciences, consisting of 80 members from around the world with more than a third Nobel Laureates. The members are chosen for their scientific excellence (like most science academies of the world) and not for their religious affiliations. This academy organized a series of scientific meetings for the last 5 years, culminating in a 2014 workshop entitled: Sustainable Humanity, Sustainable Nature , Our Responsibility, jointly organized with the Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences. This meeting of the world's thought leaders in natural and Social sciences, came to a remarkable set of conclusions: Climate Change has become a moral issue. A fundamental change in our attitude towards natue and towards each other is required to solve the problem. Religious leaders can have a transformational effect by mobilizing public opinion for actions to stabilize climate change and protect the people. Being a council member of the Pontifical Academy and watching from within the powerful moral voice of Pope Francis, I conclude that this partnership with religion is a powerful new venue for those researchers, reticent about publicly voicing their grave concerns to pursue. We are going to bring massive public support for urgent actions only when the impacts of climate change and its origins are taught in every church, every temple, every mosque, every synagogue, and other places of worship.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85864", "section":"Union"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85867" } }
{"authors":"Qing Zhao::Center for Earth System Science, Tsinghua University--Qiang Zhang::Center for Earth System Science, Tsinghua University--Bo Zheng::State Key Joint Laboratory of Environment Simulation and Pollution Control, School of Environment, Tsinghua University--Chaopeng Hong::Center for Earth System Science, Tsinghua University--Dan Tong::Center for Earth System Science, Tsinghua University--Weihua Yang::School of Food and Chemical Engineering, Beijing Technology and Business University--Kebin He::Collaborative Innovation Center for Regional Environmental Quality--", "title":"A51B-0045: Assessment of air quality management policies in China with integrated model framework: Case study for Hebei province", "abstract":"The Chinese government has pledged to clean urban air within five years from 2013 to 2017, to promote annual average PM2.5 concentration decline by 25%, 20% and 15% in the North China Plain, Yangtze River Delta and Pearl River Delta, respectively. The national targets are disaggregated into provinces, where region-specific action plan is designed and implemented by local government. It is particularly important to timely assess the effectiveness of local emission control measures and guarantee local efforts are in line with the national goal. We develop an integrated model framework for air quality management and policy evaluation, by integrating a dynamic high-resolution emission model, an emission scenarios analysis tool, and a 3-D air quality model. We then put the model system into pilot use in Hebei province for policy making to achieve the air quality target of 2017. We first integrate over 3000 point source facilities into this system to develop a high-resolution emission inventory. Upon the base emission dataset, the efforts to mitigate emissions with current and enacted measures are tracked and quantified to dynamic account of emission changes monthly. Strict policies are designed within the model framework through analyzing the potential to cut emissions for each point source. The finalized policy package can reduce emissions of major air pollutants by 20%-40%, respectively, leading to large decrease of ambient PM2.5 concentration.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85867", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85868" } }
{"authors":"William Leavitt::Washington University in St Louis--Theodore Flynn::Argonne National Laboratory--Melanie Suess::Washington University in St Louis--Alexander Bradley::Washington University in St Louis--", "title":"B21A-0412: Electron-bifurcating transhydrogenase is central to hydrogen isotope fractionation during lipid biosynthesis in sulfate reducing bacteria", "abstract":"A significant range in microbial lipid 2H/1H ratios is observed in modern marine sediments [Li et al. 2009. GCA]. The magnitude of hydrogen isotope fractionation between microbial lipids and growth water (2εlipid-H2O) is hypothesized to relate to the central carbon and energy metabolism [Zhang et al. 2009. PNAS]. These observations have raised the intriguing possibility for culture independent identification of the dominant metabolic pathways operating in environments critical to the geological record. One such metabolism we would like to track for its global significance in sedimentary carbon cycling is bacterial sulfate reduction [Jørgensen. 1982. Nature]. To-date, heterotrophic sulfate reducing bacteria (SRB) have been observed to produce lipids that are depleted in fatty acid H-isotope composition, relative to growth water (2εlipid-H2O ~ -125 to -175 ‰), with experiments on different substrates yielding little variability [Campbell et al. 2009. GCA; Osburn. 2013; Dawson et al. 2015. Geobiology]. In stark contrast, aerobic heterotrophs show a wide range in fractionations (2εlipid-H2O ~ +300 to -125‰) which seems to scale with the route cellular carbon metabolism [Zhang et al. 2009. PNAS; Heinzelmann et al. 2015. Front Microbio]. Recent work in aerobic methylotrophs [Bradley et al. 2014. AGU] implicates transhydrogenase (TH) activity as a critical control on 2εlipid-H2O. This work suggests a specific driving mechanism for this range in fractionation is the ratio of intracellular NADPH/NADH, and more fundamentally, the intracellular redox state. In SRB a key component of energy metabolism is the activity of electron-bifurcating TH [Price et al. 2014. Front Microbio], for which a recent transposon mutant library has generated a number of knockouts in the target gene [Kuehl et al. 2014. mBio] in the model organism Desulfovibrio alaskensis strain G20. In this study we compare growth rates, fatty acid concentrations and 2εlipid-H2O from wild type and TH mutants in strain G20. We observed significant growth rate and isotopic phenotypes as a function of substrate when the TH is involved in carbon and energy metabolism. We discuss implications for understanding H-isotope fractionation during microbial fatty acid biosynthesis in sulfate reducers and anaerobes in general in anoxic environments.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85868", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85869" } }
{"authors":"Michelle Robinson::Humboldt State University--Sam Flanagan::Bureau of Land Management--Mark Hemphill-Haley::Humboldt State University--", "title":"EP41A-0917: Terrace Formation in the Upper Headwater Region of the Mattole River Watershed Across the Mendocino Triple Junction, Northwest California", "abstract":"The Mattole River, in northwestern California, is located in a tectonically active and geologically complex area, the Mendocino triple junction (MTJ), where the North American, Pacific and Gorda plates meet. The Mattole River does not follow the classic river “concave-up” profile. Instead, the river headwaters have wide valleys of low gradient fill, cut and strath terraces with deeply incised active channels. In fact, the river has a “convex-up” profile with a low gradient headwater leading to a higher gradient midcourse. Terrace formation in the upper headwater region of the Mattole River records times of disequilibrium of channel profile and incision as the river responds to changes that are, in large part, due to the passage of the northwardly migrating, thermally buoyant MTJ. In order to investigate the distribution and relative ages of terraces, detailed surveys of terrace surfaces and bedrock strath positions were conducted along four headwater tributaries: Thompson Creek, Baker Creek, Lost River and Ancestor Creek. Additionally, across the terraces, hand borings were excavated to bedrock to provide a three dimensional image of terrace thickness. Terrace morphology and stratigraphy provide information on terrace forming mechanisms and timing. This study includes high-resolution geomorphic data regarding the relation of Mattole headwater terraces to the MTJ, as well as provides more temporal information about the fluvial system’s response to the ongoing northward migration of the MTJ.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85869", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85870" } }
{"authors":"Danny Feucht::University of Colorado at Boulder--Anne Sheehan::University of Colorado at Boulder--Paul Bedrosian::USGS--", "title":"GP23C-04: Joint interpretation of seismic tomography and new magnetotelluric results provide evidence for support of high topography in the Southern Rocky Mountains and High Plains of eastern Colorado, USA", "abstract":"A recent magnetotelluric (MT) survey in central Colorado, USA, when interpreted alongside existing seismic tomography, reveals potential mechanisms of support for high topography both regionally and locally. Broadband and long period magnetotelluric data were collected at twenty-three sites along a 330 km E-W profile across the Southern Rocky Mountains and High Plains of central North America as part of the Deep RIFT Electrical Resistivity (DRIFTER) experiment. Remote-reference data processing yielded high quality MT data over a period range of 100 Hz to 10,000 seconds. A prominent feature of the regional geo-electric structure is the Denver Basin, which contains a thick package of highly conductive shales and porous sandstone aquifers. One-dimensional forward modeling was performed on stations within the Denver Basin to estimate depth to the base of this shallow conductor. Those estimates were then used to place a horizontal penalty cut in the model mesh of a regularized two-dimensional inversion. Two-dimensional modeling of the resistivity structure reveals two major anomalous regions in the lithosphere: 1) a high conductivity region in the crust under the tallest peaks of the Rocky Mountains and 2) a lateral step increase in lithospheric resistivity beneath the plains. The Rocky Mountain crustal anomaly coincides with low seismic wave speeds and enhanced heat flow and is thus interpreted as evidence of partial melt and/or high temperature fluids emplaced in the crust by tectonic activity along the Rio Grande Rift. The lateral variation in the mantle lithosphere, while co-located with a pronounced step increase in seismic velocity, appears to be a gradational boundary in resistivity across eastern Colorado and could indicate a small degree of compositional modification at the edge of the North American craton. These inferred conductivity mechanisms, namely crustal melt and modification of mantle lithosphere, likely contribute to high topography locally in the Rocky Mountains and regionally in the High Plains.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85870", "section":"Geomagnetism and Paleomagnetism"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85871" } }
{"authors":"Takeshi Nakamura::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--Taro Okamoto::Tokyo Institute of Technology--Hiroshi Takenaka::Okayama University--", "title":"T51D-2927: Complex Seismic Wavefield of Long-Period Components around the Nankai Trough in Southwest Japan and its Effect on Source Mechanism Analyses", "abstract":"Previous simulation studies on seismic waves for a suboceanic earthquake showed that the long-period component can be significantly amplified and prolonged during their propagation to land areas: e.g., Furumura et al. (2008) indicated that low-velocity sediment layers such as accretionary prisms around the trough area considerably affected the propagation of surface waves and were the cause of the long-period motions. Such investigations on the motions and their relations with subsurface structures are very important in discussing disaster mitigation for future subduction-zone earthquakes. In this study, we simulated seismic wavefields for small- to moderate-sized suboceanic earthquakes and investigated the propagation of surface waves at each period of long-period ranges in land and seafloor areas. Our simulation results presented interesting features on the propagation pattern in the areas. The Rayleigh wave at a central period of 10 s propagates with a slower speed in seafloor area than that in land area because of their strong dependence on shallow structures with low seismic velocities such as sediment layers, an oceanic layer, and oceanic crusts. For a period of 15 s, however, the Rayleigh wave propagates with a faster speed in seafloor area than that in land area because of the dependence to oceanic mantle with high velocities. For a period of 20 s, the differences of the propagation between land and seafloor areas are not clearly found. These complex propagation patterns are also demonstrated in the spatial variations of phase and group velocities for the fundamental mode of Rayleigh waves and are explained by velocity differences in the structures between land and ocean areas. Our results indicate that either the point-source or the finite-source waveform analyses in the long-period range using a combined land and seafloor data would potentially produce incorrect evaluations and results if the velocity differences are not correctly incorporated into the analyses.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85871", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85872" } }
{"authors":"Daniel Hummer::Carnegie Institution for Science Washington--Robert Hazen::Carnegie Inst--Joshua Golden::University of Arizona--Robert Downs::University of Arizona--", "title":"V51C-3040: Constraints on the Mineral Evolution of Terrestrial Planets Using Statistical Correlations Among the Mineral-Forming Elements", "abstract":"The mineralogy of terrestrial planets is governed not only by size, bulk chemical composition, planetary differentiation processes, and secondary geochemical processes, but also by the fundamental way in which a planet’s constituent elements parse themselves into mineral species. To gain insight into which elements tend to associate with each other to form minerals, we have used the IMA mineralogical database (rruff.info/ima) to conduct a statistical analysis of the number of known mineral species containing each of the 72 mineral-forming elements, as well as how many species contain both X and Y for every possible X-Y pair of elements. The frequency with which elements X and Y occur together in the nominal chemical formulae of minerals was compared with the expected rate of co-occurrence (assuming that elements are distributed among mineral species randomly).  The results reveal that among the most strongly correlated element pairs are H-O, Na-Si, Al-Si, S-Ag, O-Si, Si-Ca, and O-Ca. Examples of strongly anti-correlated pairs are O-S, O-Ag, Si-S, O-Sb, O-Se, H-Ag, and Si-As. The strength of these correlations and anti-correlations varied by many orders of magnitude (as measured by their p-value in a chi-squared test for variable dependence), ranging from near 1 to an astounding 10-304. Out of 2520 unique element pairs, 1688 were statistically significant (p-value <0.05). These pair correlations can be attributed to an array of geochemical factors, including but not limited to 1) the mutual exclusivity of sulfide vs. silicate anionic groups, 2) crystal chemical considerations of size and charge similarities among cations, especially within silicate structures, 3) group relationships on the periodic table, and 4) soft vs. hard ion relationships. These principles, along with the specific correlations they produce, can serve as a valuable guide in explaining the mineral evolution of Earth’s crust, and predicting the mineralogy of terrestrial planets even when the bulk composition is significantly different than that of Earth.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85872", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85873" } }
{"authors":"Melissa Kenney::University of Maryland College Park--", "title":"ED13H-08: Training Multidisciplinary Scholars in Science Policy for Careers in Academia, Private Sector, and Public Service", "abstract":"Regardless of a graduate student’s ultimate career ambitions, it is becoming increasingly important to either develop skills to successfully transition into non-academic careers or to be able to understand the societal benefits of basic and applied research programs. In this talk I will provide my prospective -- from working in academia, the Federal government, and as an independent consultant -- about the training that we need for graduate students to navigate the jungle gym of career opportunities available (or not available) after they graduate. In particular, I will speak to the need for science policy training, in which scientific and coordination skills are put to use to help support societal decisions. I will assert that, to effectively train graduate students, it is necessary to provide experiences in multidisciplinary, policy-relevant scholarship to build marketable skills critical for a student’s professional development.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85873", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85874" } }
{"authors":"Timothy Garrett::Univ Utah--Shailesh Alva::University of Utah--Ian Glenn::University of Utah--Steven Krueger::Univ of Utah-Meteorology--", "title":"A22A-03: An application of statistical mechanics for representing equilibrium perimeter distributions of tropical convective clouds", "abstract":"There are two possible approaches for parameterizing sub-grid cloud dynamics in a coarser grid model. The most common is to use a fine scale model to explicitly resolve the mechanistic details of clouds to the best extent possible, and then to parameterize these behaviors cloud state for the coarser grid. A second is to invoke physical intuition and some very general theoretical principles from equilibrium statistical mechanics. This approach avoids any requirement to resolve time-dependent processes in order to arrive at a suitable solution. The second approach is widely used elsewhere in the atmospheric sciences: for example the Planck function for blackbody radiation is derived this way, where no mention is made of the complexities of modeling a large ensemble of time-dependent radiation-dipole interactions in order to obtain the “grid-scale” spectrum of thermal emission by the blackbody as a whole. We find that this statistical approach may be equally suitable for modeling convective clouds. Specifically, we make the physical argument that the dissipation of buoyant energy in convective clouds is done through mixing across a cloud perimeter. From thermodynamic reasoning, one might then anticipate that vertically stacked isentropic surfaces are characterized by a power law dlnN/dlnP = -1, where N(P) is the number clouds of perimeter P. In a Giga-LES simulation of convective clouds within a 100 km square domain we find that such a power law does appear to characterize simulated cloud perimeters along isentropes, provided a sufficient cloudy sample. The suggestion is that it may be possible to parameterize certain important aspects of cloud state without appealing to computationally expensive dynamic simulations. ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85874", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85875" } }
{"authors":"Christopher Black::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Sarah Davis::Ohio University, Voinovich School for Leadership and Public Affairs--Tara Hudiburg::University of Idaho--Carl Bernacchi::Global Change and Photosynthesis Research Unit, Agricultural Research Service, USDA--Evan DeLucia::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--", "title":"B21F-0533: Climate change increases soil C losses from a corn-soy ecosystem", "abstract":"Warming temperatures and increasing CO2 are likely to have large effects on the amount of carbon stored in soil, but predictions of these effects are poorly constrained. Higher plant productivity from increased CO2 has been expected to raise soil carbon stocks by increasing root and litter inputs, but may instead prime microbial activity and cause further carbon losses. Previous work at SoyFACE has shown soil carbon to be declining, and this trend has continued despite more than ten years of higher carbon inputs from increased plant productivity under elevated CO2, supporting the hypothesis that new carbon is priming decomposition rather than organic matter accumulation. We elevated temperature (+3.5 °C) and CO2 (+200 ppm) for three years in a factorial experiment on a corn-soybean agroecosystem. We used mobile gas analyzers to monitor respiration by roots and soil microbes, then used a process-based ecosystem model (DayCent) to simulate the decadal effects of warming and CO2 enrichment on soil C. We predicted that heat would accelerate the previously observed priming of organic matter decomposition, leading to higher respiration from heated elevated-CO2 plots and accelerated carbon losses over time. Both heating and elevated CO2 increased respiration from soil microbes, but reduced repiration from roots and rhizosphere. The effects were additive, with no heat x CO2 interactions. Particulate organic matter and total soil C declined over time and were lower under elevated CO2 plots than in ambient plots, but did not differ between heat treatments. DayCent simulations of heated plots agreed with our observations and predicted loss of ~15% of SOC under heating, but simulations of elevated CO2 failed to capture the observed priming of SOC losses and instead predicted a ~4% gain in SOC. These results suggest that soil C models may need to explicitly consider priming effects and that Midwestern agricultural soils may lose C on a massive scale in the coming decades.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85875", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85877" } }
{"authors":"Katerina Dontsova::University of Arizona--Sabrina Juarez::CNRS, ECOTRON Ile-­‐De-­‐France--Jean-François Le Galliard::CNRS, ECOTRON Ile-­‐De-­‐France--Simon Chollet::CNRS, ECOTRON Ile-­‐De-­‐France--Alexis Cros::CNRS, ECOTRON Ile-­‐De-­‐France--Mathieu Llavata::CNRS, ECOTRON Ile-­‐De-­‐France--Florent Massol::CNRS, ECOTRON Ile-­‐De-­‐France--Pierre Barré::CNRS, Laboratoire de Géologie de l'ENS--Alexandre Gelabert::IPGP, Géochimie des eaux--Damien Daval::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Jerome Corvisier::MINES ParisTech--Peter Troch::University of Arizona--Greg Barron-Gafford::University of Arizona--Joost Van Haren::University of Arizona--Regis Ferrière::ENS, IBENS--", "title":"GC13C-1176: Effect of elevated CO2 and temperature on abiotic and biologically-driven basalt weathering and C sequestration", "abstract":"Weathering of primary silicates is one of the mechanisms involved in carbon removal from the atmosphere, affecting the carbon cycle at geologic timescales with basalt significantly contributing to the global weathering CO2 flux. Mineral weathering can be enhanced by microbiota and plants. Increase in both temperature and amount of CO2 in the atmosphere can directly increase weathering and can also affect weathering through impact on biological systems. This would result in possible negative feedback on climate change. The goal of this research was to quantify direct and indirect effects of temperature and elevated CO2 on basalt weathering and carbon sequestration. In order to achieve this goal we performed controlled-environment mesocosm experiments at Ecotron Ile-de-France. Granular basalt collected in Flagstaff, AZ was exposed to rainfall at equilibrium with two different CO2 concentrations in the air, ambient (400 ppm) and elevated (800 ppm); and kept at two climate regimes, with ambient and elevated (+ 4° C) temperature. Four biological treatments were superimposed on this design: a plant-free control; N-fixing grass (alfalfa, Medicago sativa), N-fixing tree (Velvet mesquite, Prosopis velutina); and grass that does not form symbiotic relationships with N fixers (Green Sprangletop, Leptochloa dubia). All used basalt had native microbial community. Mesocosms were equipped with solution and gas samplers. To monitor biogenic and lithogenic weathering product concentrations, soil solution samples were collected under vacuum after each rainfall event and analyzed to determine pH, electrical conductivity, major and trace elements concentrations, anions concentrations, and aqueous phase organic matter chemistry. Soil gases were monitored for CO2 using porous Teflon gas samplers connected to the Vaisala probes. Plant biomass was collected at the end of the experiment to determine dry weight, as well as removal of N and lithogenic elements by the plants. Solid samples were collected to connect the measured weathered fluxes in solution with the mineralogical evolution. Obtained values for the solution composition, gas fluxes and solid phase changes will be used to determine dissolution rates, weathering incongruence and carbon sequestration using multicomponent reactive transport modeling.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85877", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85878" } }
{"authors":"Joo-Ae Kim::KBSI Korea Basic Science Institute--Hye-On Yoon::KBSI Korea Basic Science Institute--Jin-Chul Kim::KBSI Korea Basic Science Institute--Kang-Sup Chung::KIGAM Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources--Jung-Ho Ryu::KIGAM Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources--", "title":"OS13B-2053: Monitoring and toxicity evaluation of phytoplankton on lithium manganese oxide adsorbents at lithium recovery pilot plant field.", "abstract":"For recovery of rare mineral resources such as lithium or boron from seawater, the lithium adsorbent material have been made by Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources (KIGAM) and pilot plant was conducted in Okgye Harbor, Gangneung, Korea. The application of lithium adsorbent in pilot plant, it is important to consider the impact on the marine environment. Especially phytoplankton communities are important marine microorganism to represent marine primary product. At the same time, phytoplankton is possible to induce the decrease of lithium recovery rate due to cause of biofouling to surfaces of lithium adsorbents. Therefore long-term and periodic monitoring of phytoplankton is necessary to understand the environmental impact and biofouling problems near the lithium pilot plant. The abundance and biomass of phytoplankton have been evaluated through monthly interval sampling from February 2013 to May 2015. Abundance and species diversity of phytoplankton went up to summer from winter. When lithium adsorbents were immersing to seawater, eco-toxicities of released substances were determined using Microtox with bioluminescence bacteria Vibrio fischeri. The adsorbents were soaked in sterilized seawater and aeration for 1, 3, 5, 7, 10 and 14 days intervals under controlled temperature. Maximum EC50 concentration was 61.4% and this toxicity was showed in more than 10 days exposure.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85878", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85879" } }
{"authors":"Brenda Ekwurzel::Union of Concerned Scientists Washington DC--Leehi Yona::Dartmouth College--Susan Natali::Woods Hole Research Center--Robert Holmes::Woods Hole Research Center--Edward Schuur::Northern Arizona University--", "title":"PA31D-07: Arctic Council Nations Could Encourage Development of Climate Indicator: Flux to the Atmosphere from Arctic Permafrost Carbon", "abstract":"Permafrost regions store almost twice the carbon in the atmosphere (Tarnocai et al 2009). As climate warms a proportion of this carbon will be released as carbon dioxide and methane. The Arctic Council may be best suited to harness international scientific collaboration for policy relevant knowledge about the global impacts of permafrost thaw. Scientists in Arctic Council and observer states have historically collaborated on permafrost research (e.g. Permafrost Carbon Network, part of Study of Environmental Arctic Change (SEARCH) project). This work increased knowledge of permafrost carbon pool size and vulnerability. However, data gaps persist across the Arctic. Despite gaps, numerous studies directly inform international policy negotiations aiming to stay below 2° C. Some suggest “permafrost carbon feedback” may comprise 3 to 11% of total allowed emissions through 2100 under a RCP4.5 (Schaefer et al2014). Understanding and accounting for future permafrost atmospheric carbon release requires science and policy coordination that the Arctic Council could incentivize. For example, Council nations could convene scientists and stakeholders to develop a Permafrost-Climate Indicator providing more direct decision support than current permafrost indicators, and identify research needed for a periodic estimate of Arctic permafrost CO2 and CH4 emissions. This presentation covers current challenges scientists and policymakers may face to develop a practical and robust Permafrost Climate Indicator. For example, which timescales are most appropriate for international emissions commitments? Do policy-relevant timescales align with current scientific knowledge? What are the uncertainties and how can they be decreased? We present likely strengths and challenges of a Permafrost Climate Indicator co-developed by scientists and stakeholders. Potential greenhouse gas atmospheric flux from Arctic permafrost carbon may be greater than some nations’ United Nations emissions reductions commitments. Investing in better understanding greenhouse gas emissions from thawing permafrost is relevant for all nations and essential to setting global emission targets.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85879", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85880" } }
{"authors":"Christian Haas::York University--Sascha Willmes::University Trier--", "title":"C31A-05: Remote Sensing of Snow on Sea Ice – What are we Missing?", "abstract":"Snow on sea ice and its seasonal changes are most important contributors to the year-round sea ice mass balance and are in many ways more characteristic of sea ice satellite signatures than sea ice properties themselves. Snow thickness, density, and stratigraphy are among the most important snow variables, affecting snow optical properties, thermal conductivity, and microwave signatures. All these are interconnected and vary on diurnal, seasonal, annual as well as spatial time scales. Our physical understanding and observational capabilities are still inadequate to sufficiently observe, understand, and predict snow and its impact on the ice, climate, and eco systems. Similarly, the collection of in-situ data to support development and validation of snow retrieval algorithms is hampered by challenges related to the inherent small- and large-scale variability of snow properties and to differing footprint sizes of all methods. Here we present results from efforts to collect in-situ data on Antarctic and Arctic sea ice to validate satellite microwave products and airborne snow thickness retrievals. Data were collected during cruises of the German icebreaker RV Polarstern and airborne ESA CryoSat Validation and NASA Icebridge campaigns. Results show that there is still a lack of understanding of satellite microwave products affected by variations in snow properties, and of the penetration and resolution of snow-penetrating snow thickness radars which can lead to wrong interpretations of data and results. However, there also remains uncertainty about “true” snow properties and processes within satellite or airborne footprints because even more extensive in-situ validation campaigns may not be able to sufficiently observe these, lacking advanced methodologies and a combination of spatial resolution and spatial coverage.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85880", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85882" } }
{"authors":"Marzieh Azarderakhsh::Fairleigh Dickinson University--Kyle McDonald::CUNY City College--Mahta Moghaddam::University of Southern California--Jane Whitcomb::University of Southern California--", "title":"B51G-0516: A Method to Monitor Seasonal Inundation States Using High Resolution ALOS PALSAR ScanSAR Observations in Alaksa", "abstract":"Inland water extent is crucial to enhancing our knowledge about the biogeochemical transitions, carbon dynamics and prediction of boreal-arctic ecosystem. However, in high latitute regions inundation is directly affected by the timing of freeze and thaw conditions at the surface. In other words, these two features (i.e. freeze/thaw and inundation analysis) are interconnected and should be considered simultaneously in understanding hydrological and carbon cycles. One of advantages of L-band microwave satellite observation over optical observation is to penetrate to the clouds and vegetation to detect inundated areas. A recent study usese fine-beam mode of PALSAR observation Fine Beam Data (FBD) with resolution of up to 12m as well as ground based land cover using Random Forest Classification method to classify different types of wetlands over Alaska. However, these observations are not frequent and it makes the seasonal and inter-annual studies challenging. We employ PALSAR ScanSAR mode data with more frequent temporal coverage of up to 40 days along with the static map dervied from FBD data to study the timing of the inundation for these wetland classes for 2007- 2010 years period. This study has the advantage of providing freeze-thaw states to detect the timing of active season and then to provide timing of inundated surfaces. Traditional approaches normalize ScanSAR mode data with varying incidence angle to far angle using either histogram method or linear fit methods. We use a unique method that uses the angle dependency of different land cover types to detect inundated surfaces especially the ones that are mixed with vegetation. The seasonal and temporal inundation and freeze/thaw states maps are generated which agree well with previous studies, ancillary data, and ground observations over different land-cover classes. The results of this study benefits hydrological and carbon cycle studies as an important source of carbon uptake in arctic regions. Moreover, the results can be used for validation of newly launched Soil Moisture Active/Passive (SMAP) mission which has devoted an L-band active to predict seasonal freeze/thaw states in global scale.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85882", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85883" } }
{"authors":"Daniel Kotovsky::University of Florida--Robert Moore::University of Florida--", "title":"AE33C-0504: Photo-chemical response of the night-time mesosphere to electric field heating", "abstract":"A zero-dimensional, photo-chemical model of the night-time mesosphere based upon the Mitra-Rowe scheme [Rowe et al., 1974] has been developed to examine the time dynamics of electron density changes produced by high-intensity, electric field heating. Additional negative- and positive-ion processes necessary to account for high electron temperatures (order of eV) have been included. Results of the model are compared to the time dynamics of lightning produced, early VLF scattering events. Among other results, we discuss co-operative mechanisms which lead to slow enhancements of electron densities (up to a few seconds) proceeding a single, shorter duration electric field heating pulse. Such mechanisms are capable of explaining all observations of early/slow VLF scattering events to date, including those associated with only a single observed radio atmospheric.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85883", "section":"Atmospheric and Space Electricity"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85885" } }
{"authors":"Jin-Hee Kim::Kyung Hee University--Soo-ock Kim::Kyung Hee University--Jin I. Yun::Kyung Hee University--", "title":"GC13D-1192: Projections of Future Summer Weather in Seoul and Their Impacts on Urban Agriculture", "abstract":"Climate departure from the past variability was projected to start in 2042 for Seoul. In order to understand the implication of climate departure in Seoul for urban agriculture, we evaluated the daily temperature for the June-September period from 2041 to 2070, which were projected by the RCP8.5 climate scenario. These data were analyzed with respect to climate extremes and their effects on growth of hot pepper (Capsicum annuum), one of the major crops in urban farming. The mean daily maximum and minimum temperatures in 2041-2070 approached to the 90th percentile in the past 30 years (1951- 1980). However, the frequency of extreme events such as heat waves and tropical nights appeared to exceed the past variability. While the departure of mean temperature might begin in or after 2040, the climate departure in the sense of extreme weather events seems already in progress. When the climate scenario data were applied to the growth and development of hot pepper, the departures of both planting date and harvest date are expected to follow those of temperature. However, the maximum duration for hot pepper cultivation, which is the number of days between the first planting and the last harvest, seems to have already deviated from the past variability.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85885", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85886" } }
{"authors":"Ziyu Shen::Wuhan University--WenBin Shen::Wuhan University of Technology--Shuangxi Zhang::Wuhan University--", "title":"G33B-1140: Determination of gravitational potential and the orthometric height of Mt. Everest using clocks onboard satellite and on ground: preliminary simulation results", "abstract":"Based on our proposed approach (Shen et al 2015) for determining the gravitational potential using high-frequency-stability microwave links between satellite and ground station, here we provide preliminary simulations results. Two precise clocks (oscillators) are equipped onboard a satellite and at a ground station, respectively. The ground oscillator emits a signal with frequency fa towards the satellite and the satellite receiver receives this signal with frequency fb. After receiving this signal, towards the ground station the satellite oscillator emits two signals which have the frequencies fb and fc, respectively. By a combination of these three frequencies based on Doppler cancelation system, the gravitational potential difference between the satellite and the ground station can be determined. Concerning a datum station and a station at Mt. Everest, we may determine the geopotential difference between these two stations via a satellite, and consequrently determine the orthometric height of Mt. Everest. In the simulations, we use 9000 observations (a length of about 2hrs observations), and results show that most offset values are in the order of 0.1 m (in equivalent height). The mean value of the differences is -0.008 m, and standard deviation is around 0.3 m. Since atomic clocks with stability around 10E-18 have been generated, the proposed approach is prospective in the near future. This study is supported by National 973 Project China (grant No. 2013CB733301 and 2013CB733305) and NSFC (grant Nos. 41174011, 41210006, 41429401).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85886", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85887" } }
{"authors":"Kelly Ryan::NOAA-AOML--Lisa Bucci::University of Miami--Hui Christophersen::NOAA-AOML University of Miami--Robert Atlas::NOAA Miami--Shirley Murillo::NOAA Miami--Peter Dodge::NOAA-AOML--", "title":"A41E-0110: OSSE Evaluation of Prospective Aircraft Reconnaissance Flight Patterns and their Impact on Hurricane Forecasts", "abstract":"Each year, NOAA/AOML’s Hurricane Research Division (HRD) conducts its Hurricane field Program in which observations are collected via NOAA aircraft to improve the understanding and prediction of hurricanes. Mission experiments suggest a variety of flight patterns and sampling strategies aimed towards their respective goals described by the Intensity Forecasting Experiment (IFEX; Rogers et al., BAMS, 2006, 2013), a collaborative effort among HRD, NHC, and EMC. Evaluating the potential impact of various trade-offs in design is valuable for determining the optimal air reconnaissance flight pattern for a given prospective mission. AOML’s HRD has developed a system for performing regional Observing System Simulation Experiments (OSSEs) to assess the potential impact of proposed observing systems on hurricane track and intensity forecasts and analyses. This study focuses on investigating the potential impact of proposed aircraft reconnaissance observing system designs. Aircraft instrument and flight level retrievals were simulated from a regional WRF ARW Nature Run (Nolan et al., 2013) spanning 13 days, covering the life cycle of a rapidly intensifying Atlantic tropical cyclone. The aircraft trajectories are simulated in a variety of ways and are evaluated to investigate the potential impact of aircraft reconnaissance observations on hurricane track and intensity forecasts.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85887", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85888" } }
{"authors":"Xiujun Wang::Beijing Normal University--Jiaping Wang::Shihezi University--Xianglan Li::Beijing Normal University--Yang Guo::Beijing Normal University--", "title":"B23G-0686: Potential of Carbon Sequestration as Soil Carbonate in Arid and Semi-arid Region of North China: Impacts of Land Use Change", "abstract":"Soil carbonate (SIC) exceeds organic carbon (SOC) greatly in (semi-)arid lands, thus may be important for carbon sequestration. However, field data for studying SIC dynamics and quantifying SIC accumulation have been lacking. This paper consists of two parts. We first present our recent findings of SIC accumulation in the croplands of north China (Wang et al., 2014; 2015). We then report a meta-analysis of field based SIC data from 745 soil profiles in China. Our recent findings were based on two sets of data: >100 soil samples recently collected from the Yanqi Basin of central Xinjiang and ~200 archived soil samples from four long-term experiment (LTE) sites in the north China. Our study showed that intensive cropping in the arid and semi-arid region leaded to a greater increase in SIC than in SOC; organic amendments enhanced SIC accumulation in the cropland of north China. Our meta-analysis shows that despite a large variation of SIC stock (5-42 kg C m-2), SIC storage in agricultural soils is generally higher relative to non-agricultural soils. We provide assessment how land use change may affect SIC storage in north China.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85888", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85891" } }
{"authors":"Bumsuk Seo::Seoul National University Kangwon National University--", "title":"NG33A-1848: Classifying Multi-year Land Use and Land Cover using Deep Convolutional Neural Networks", "abstract":"Cultivated ecosystems constitute a particularly frequent form of human land use. Long-term management of a cultivated ecosystem requires us to know temporal change of land use and land cover (LULC) of the target system. Land use and land cover changes (LUCC) in agricultural ecosystem is often rapid and unexpectedly occurs. Thus, longitudinal LULC is particularly needed to examine trends of ecosystem functions and ecosystem services of the target system. Multi-temporal classification of land use and land cover (LULC) in complex heterogeneous landscape remains a challenge. Agricultural landscapes often made up of a mosaic of numerous LULC classes, thus spatial heterogeneity is large. Moreover, temporal and spatial variation within a LULC class is also large. Under such a circumstance, standard classifiers would fail to identify the LULC classes correctly due to the heterogeneity of the target LULC classes. Because most standard classifiers search for a specific pattern of features for a class, they fail to detect classes with noisy and/or transformed feature data sets. Recently, deep learning algorithms have emerged in the machine learning communities and shown superior performance on a variety of tasks, including image classification and object recognition. In this paper, we propose to use convolutional neural networks (CNN) to learn from multi-spectral data to classify agricultural LULC types. Based on multi-spectral satellite data, we attempted to classify agricultural LULC classes in Soyang watershed, South Korea for the three years’ study period (2009-2011). The classification performance of support vector machine (SVM) and CNN classifiers were compared for different years. Preliminary results demonstrate that the proposed method can improve classification performance compared to the SVM classifier. The SVM classifier failed to identify classes when trained on a year to predict another year, whilst CNN could reconstruct LULC maps of the catchment over the study period. Our results show that the new deep learning algorithms can improve learning from multi-temporal ground truth data sets. The findings of the study can be useful to studies focusing on multi-temporal LULC classification.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85891", "section":"Nonlinear Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85892" } }
{"authors":"Shin'ichiro Kamiya::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--Kensuke Suzuki::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--Narumi Takahashi::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--", "title":"T51D-2922: Thickness of the Descending Philippine Sea Plate Estimated from Tomographic Images beneath the Kumano Basin, along the Nankai Trough, Southwestern Japan", "abstract":"The Philippine Sea plate subducts northwestward beneath the Japanese islands from the south. The average thickness of the overall Philippine Sea plate has been investigated in the oceanic area using surface wave analyses [e.g. Abe and Kanamori, 1970], suggesting a thin (30–40 km thick) plate. On the other hand, several studies have indicated a thicker Philippine Sea plate based on source mechanisms and seismicity in the eastern rim of the plate [Seno, 1987; Moriyama et al., 1989]. From tomographic images, Kamiya and Kobayashi [2007] pointed out that the subducting Philippine Sea slab has thickness variation with a stepwise offset east of Izu Peninsula. The eastern (the Kanto district) and western (north of Izu Peninsula and the Tokai district) regions have respective thicknesses of 60 and 25 km. In the Kumano basin, the Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC) developed the Dense Oceanfloor Network System for Earthquakes and Tsunami (DONET) in order to monitor seismic activity [Kaneda et al., 2009; Kawaguchi et al., 2010]. DONET ocean-bottom stations are connected with an optical fiber cable, and data are transferred in real time to our laboratory at JAMSTEC. The present study obtains three-dimensional P-wave and S-wave seismic velocity models beneath the Kumano basin by employing an travel time tomography technique. We pick arrival times of P and S waves from the waveform data recorded by the DONET system during the period from January 2011 to December 2014. In order to improve the resolution in the deeper regions than the seismic area inside of the descending slab, we also pick arrival times from the seismic events occurred outside of this district. We use these picked arrival times adding to the JMA catalogue data in seismic tomography. From the obtained tomographic images, we find high velocity anomalies corresponding to the descending Philippine Sea slab. We also find low velocity anomalies under the high velocity slab clearly. There seems to be a sharp velocity contrast between the anomalies. We can estimate the thickness of the descending slab at about 30 km, which is almost consistent with the thickness beneath the Tokai district estimated by Kamiya and Kobayashi [2007] and comparable to the effective elastic thickness beneath the eastern part of the Shikoku basin estimated by Yoshioka and Ito [2001].", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85892", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85893" } }
{"authors":"Chi-Yao Hung::National Taiwan University--Colin Stark::Lamont -Doherty Earth Observatory--Herve Capart::National Taiwan University--Liming Li::Columbia University in the City of New York--Breannan Smith::Columbia University in the City of New York--Eitan Grinspun::Columbia University in the City of New York--", "title":"EP21B-0898: Granular flow in a rotating drum: Experiments and theory", "abstract":"Erosion at the base of a debris flow fundamentally controls how large the flow will become and how far it will travel. Experimental observations of this important phenomenon are rather limited, and this lack has led theoretical treatments to making ad hoc assumptions about the basal process. In light of this, we carried out a combination of laboratory experiments and theoretical analysis of granular flow in a rotating drum, a canonical example of steady grain motion in which entrainment rates can be precisely controlled. Our main result is that basal sediment is entrained as the velocity profile adjusts to imbalance in the flow of kinetic energy. Our experimental apparatus consisted of a 40cm-diameter drum, 4cm-deep, half-filled with 2.3mm grains. Rotation rates varied from 1-70 rpm. We varied the effective scale by varying effective gravity from 1g to 70g on a geotechnical centrifuge. The field of grain motion was recorded using high-speed video and mapped using particle tracking velocimetry. In tandem we developed a depth-averaged theory using balance equations for mass, momentum and kinetic energy. We assumed a linearized GDR Midi granular rheology [da Cruz, 2005] and a Coulomb friction law along the sidewalls [Jop et al., 2005]. A scaling analysis of our equations yields a dimensionless “entrainment number” En, which neatly parametrizes the flow geometry in the drum for a wide range of variables, e.g., rotation rate and effective gravity. At low En, the flow profile is planar and kinetic energy is balanced locally in the flow layer. At high En, the flow profile is sigmoidal (yin-yang shaped) and the kinetic energy is dominated by longitudinal, streamwise transfer. We observe different scaling behavior under each of these flow regimes, e.g., between En and kinetic energy, surface slope and flow depth. Our theory correctly predicts their scaling exponents and the value of En at which the regime transition takes place. We are also able to make corrections for Coriolis and dilation effects that improve the match between theory and experiment.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85893", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85894" } }
{"authors":"Toshiyuki Bandai::University of Tokyo--Shoichiro Hamamoto::University of Tokyo--Hiromi Imoto::University of Tokyo--Taku Nishimura::University of Tokyo--Toshiko Komatsu::Saitama University--", "title":"H21A-1350: Experimental study on the validation of thermal equilibrium assumption between solid and liquid phases in convective heat flow in porous media", "abstract":"The thermal equilibrium between the solid and the liquid phases is generally assumed for numerical simulations in heat transport through soils. However, the validation of this assumption is not well investigated, especially in heat transport through coarse materials under high pore water velocity. It is important to understand heat transport mechanism in such a condition when the ground-source heat pump systems that exploit the soil as thermal source or sink are applied to permeable sand and gravel aquifers. Therefore, to investigate heat transfer between the solid and liquid phases, we conducted one-dimensional heat transport experiments using different size fractions of glass beads. In the experiments, hot water was injected to the 50-cm column packed with glass beads under different water fluxes. The temperatures of the solid and liquid phases were independently measured. In addition to glass beads, materials with different thermal properties (e.g. stainless balls) were tested. The convection-dispersion equations with the assumption of the thermal equilibrium and non-equilibrium between solid and liquid phases were applied to the measured breakthrough curves.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85894", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85895" } }
{"authors":"Arrieyana Cartier::Virginia State University--Mina Williams::Virginia State University--Jason Adolf::University of Hawaii at Hilo--Shobha Sriharan::Virginia State University--", "title":"ED33D-0969: Studies on Anthropogenic Impact on Water Quality in Hilo (Hawaii) Bay and Mapping the Study Stations Using Geospatial Technologies", "abstract":"Hilo Bay has uncharacteristically brown waters compared to other waters found in Hawai’i. The majority of the freshwater entering Hilo Bay is from storm and surface water runoff. The anthropogenic impact on water quality at Hilo Bay is due to sediment entrance, cesspools (Bacteria), and invasive species (Albizia). This poster presentation will focus on the water quality and phytoplankton collected on a weekly basis at a buoy positioned one meter from the shore of Hilo Bay, preserving the phytoplankton intact, concentrating and dehydrating the sample with ethanol, and viewing the phytoplankton with a scanning electron microscope (Hitachi S-3400NII). The GPS (Global Positioning System) points were collected at the sampling stations. Three transects on three separate dates were performed in Hilo Bay with salinity, percent dissolved oxygen, turbidity, secchi depth, temperature, and chlorophyll fluorescence data collected at each sampling station. A consistent trend observed in all transects was as distance from the river increased turbidity decreased and salinity increased. The GPS data on June 30, 2015 showed a major correlation between stations and their distance from shore. There is a decrease in the turbidity but not the temperature for these stations. The GPS points collected on July 7, 2015 at thirteen stations starting with station one being at the shore to the water, showed that the salinity concentration fluctuate noticeably at the first 6 stations. As we proceed further away from the shore, the salinity concentration increases from stations seven through thirteen. The water temperature shows little variation throughout the thirteen stations. The turbidity level was high at the shore and shows a noticeable drop at station thirteen.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85895", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85896" } }
{"authors":"Paul Mann::University of Houston--", "title":"T13F-02: Areas of Unsolved Problems in Caribbean Active Tectonics", "abstract":"I review some unsolved problems in Caribbean active tectonics.  At the regional and plate scale: 1) confirm the existence of intraplate deformation zones of the central Caribbean plate that are within the margin of error of ongoing GPS measurements; 2) carry out field studies to evaluate block models versus models for distributed fault shear on the densely populated islands of Jamaica, Hispaniola, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands; 3) carry out paleoseismological research of key plate boundary faults that may have accumulated large strains but have not been previously studied in detail; 4) determine the age of onset and far-field effects of the Cocos ridge and the Central America forearc sliver; 4) investigate the origin and earthquake-potential of obliquely-sheared rift basins along the northern coast of Venezuela; 5) determine the age of onset and regional active, tectonic effects of the Panama-South America collision including the continued activation of the Maracaibo block; and 6) validate longterm rates on active subduction zones with improving, tomographic maps of subducted slabs.  At the individual fault scale: 1) determine the mode of termination of large and active strike -slip faults and application of the STEP model (Septentrional, Polochic, El Pilar, Bocono, Santa Marta-Bucaramanaga); 2) improve the understanding of the earthquake potential on the Enriquillo-Plantain Garden fault zone given “off-fault” events such as the 2010 Haiti earthquake; how widespread is this behavior?; and 3) estimate size of future tsunamis from studies of historic or prehistoric slump scars and mass transport deposits; what potential runups can be predicted from this information?; and 4) devise ways to keep rapidly growing, circum-Caribbean urban populations better informed and safer in the face of inevitable and future, large earthquakes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85896", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85897" } }
{"authors":"Federico Moreno::University of Rochester--Sarah George::University of Texas at Austin--Lauren Williams::University of Rochester--Brian Horton::University of Texas at Austin--Carmala Garzione::University of Rochester--", "title":"T23A-2910: Depositional Record of the Bagua Basin, Northern Peru: Implications for Climate and Tectonic Evolution of Tropical South America", "abstract":"The Andes Mountains exert critical controls on the climate, hydrology, and biodiversity of South America. The Bagua Basin, a low elevation (400-600 m) intermontane basin in northern Peru, offers a unique opportunity to study the ecological, climatic, and structural evolution of the western topographic boundary of the Amazonian foreland. Situated between the Marañon fold-thrust belt of the Western Cordillera and basement block uplifts of the Eastern Cordillera, the Bagua region contains a protracted, semi-continuous record of Triassic through Pleistocene sedimentation. Whereas Triassic-Cretaceous marine deposits were potentially related to extension and regional thermal subsidence, a Paleocene-Eocene shift to shallow marine and fluvial systems marks the onset of foreland basin conditions. Oligocene-Miocene sedimentation corresponds to a braided-meandering fluvial system with exceptional development of paleosols. In this study, we use new detrital zircon U-Pb geochronologic and oxygen stable isotopic datasets to establish a chronology of pre-Andean and Andean processes within the Bagua Basin. Detrital zircon geochronology provides constraints on when the Western and Eastern cordilleras shed sediments into the basin. Syndepositional zircons within Eocene, Oligocene and Miocene strata provide key age control for a previously poorly constrained depositional chronology. Preliminary results suggest a dramatic provenance shift in which Paleocene deposits contain almost exclusively cratonic populations (500-1600 Ma) whereas Eocene deposits show a mix of syndepositional zircons from the magmatic arc, recycled Mesozoic zircons, and cratonic zircon populations. Oxygen stable isotopes (δ18O) of carbonate nodules from Neogene paleosols will help elucidate when the Eastern Cordillera became an orographic barrier intercepting moisture from the Amazon basin to the east. Together, these records will help uncover the history of tectonics and climate interaction in tropical South America.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85897", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85898" } }
{"authors":"Keisuke Nidaira::Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology--Marino Hiraoka::Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology--Takashi Gomi::Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology--Yoshimi Uchiyama::Kanagawa Prefecture--", "title":"EP53B-1012: Measurement of Channel Morphology in a Headwater Stream using Low-Altitude Photography and a 3D Model Software", "abstract":"We developed a method for measuring detail channel morphology using a low elevation photographic scanning. This study was conducted in a 36-m step-pool channel segment in a headwater stream of Ooborazawa watershed located in 20 km south of Tokyo. The channels were covered by Boenninghausenia japonica and Oplismenus undulatifolius var. undulatifolius. Therefore, topographic measurement in high altitude (up to 5 m) using a drone is not applicable. D50 and D90 of channel substrates were 4 cm and 21 cm, respectively. A plastic case that equipped with two digital cameras (RICOH CX5) is mounted at the top of 2.2 m of a glass fiber pole. Photos were taken every 5 seconds from 1.8 m above ground surface. Eleven ground control points (GCP) were installed and measured coordinates. We developed digital 3D topographic model using PhotoScan Pro edition version 1.0.0 and the developed 1 cm contour map using ArcGIS version 10.2. Furthermore, we measured the number, height, and length of steps for examining the accuracy of data. Resolution of obtained topographic model was from 9 to 11 mm per pixel. 1 cm of particle was identified using photo was 1 cm. Estimated step height was agreed to the measured step height in the field. We detected maximum channel scour from October to December, 2014 with (146.5 mm/day for maximum daily rain) occurred at pools with 13cm changes , while 5 to 10 cm of changes in sediment deposition occurred from Mya to June, 2015 with 78.5 mm/day of maximum daily rain. Disposition of sediment was concentration within the sequences of step structures. Our method allows us for understanding detail sediment movement and resultant localized channel changes in steep channels.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85898", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85899" } }
{"authors":"Liuying Du::Purdue University--Mohammad Adnan Rajib::Purdue University--Venkatesh Merwade::Purdue University--", "title":"H51K-1547: Spatio-temporal Analysis on the Combined Impact of Long-term Climate and Landuse Changes on Blue and Green Water Dynamics over the Ohio River Basin", "abstract":"Impacts of climate and landuse change on the overall water availability can be analytically comprehended in terms of long-term trends in surface and subsurface hydrologic fluxes. The surface and subsurface fluxes can be represented in terms of blue water (BW; surface runoff and deep aquifer recharge) and green water (GW; soil water content and actual evapotranspiration). The objective of this study is to present a comprehensive assessment of the spatial and temporal trend of BW and GW under the historical climate and landuse data over the period of 1935 to 2014 in the Ohio River Basin (490,000 km2), and thereby, quantify the relative effects of climate and landuse changes on their long-term dynamics. The Soil and Water Assessment Tool (SWAT) is used to simulate hydrologic fluxes for the Ohio River Basin by first changing both climate and landuse inputs, and then by only changing the climate input keeping landuse constant. The Mann-Kendall and Theil-Sen trend analyses over the whole basin show volumetric increase in both BW and GW. However, the trends reveal a regional pattern, where GW has increased significantly in the upper and lower parts of the basin in response to prominent landuse change. Whereas, BW has increased significantly only in the lower part that can be related to the significant change in precipitation there. The finding that BW is more affected by precipitation while landuse change is more influential in changing GW, is further supported from the BW and GW trend analyses at the individual sub-basin scale. The results from this study help to understand the collective influence of natural and anthropogenic impacts on hydrologic responses in the Ohio River basin, and thereby provide useful information for future water security and planning.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85899", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85900" } }
{"authors":"Fengqin Yan::CAS Chinese Academy of Sciences--Shuwen Zhang::Chinese Academy of Sciences--Liping Chang::CAS Chinese Academy of Sciences--", "title":"GC13C-1177: Comparing Several Algorithms for Change Detection of Wetland", "abstract":"As “the kidneys of the landscape” and “ecological supermarkets”, wetland plays an important role in ecological equilibrium and environmental protection．Therefore, it is of great significance to understand the dynamic changes of the wetland. Nowadays, many index and many methods have been used in dynamic Monitoring of Wetland. However, there are no single method and no single index are adapted to detect dynamic change of wetland all over the world. In this paper, three digital change detection algorithms are applied to 2005 and 2010 Landsat Thematic Mapper (TM) images of a portion of the Northeast China to detect wetland dynamic between the two dates. The change vector analysis method (CVA) uses 6 bands of TM images to detect wetland dynamic. The tassled cap transformation is used to create three change images (change in brightness, greenness, and wetness). A new method--- Comprehensive Change Detection Method (CCDM) is introduced to detect forest dynamic change. The CCDM integrates spectral-based change detection algorithms including a Multi-Index Integrated Change Analysis (MIICA) model and a novel change model called Zone, which extracts change information from two Landsat image pairs. The MIICA model is the core module of the change detection strategy and uses four spectral indices (differenced Normalized Burn Ratio (dNBR), differenced Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (dNDVI), the Change Vector (CV) and a new index called the Relative Change Vector Maximum (RCVMAX)) to obtain the changes that occurred between two image dates. The CCDM also includes a knowledge-based system, which uses critical information on historical and current land cover conditions and trends and the likelihood of land cover change, to combine the changes from MIICA and Zone. Related test proved that CCDM method is simple, easy to operate, widely applicable, and capable of capturing a variety of natural and anthropogenic disturbances potentially associated with land cover changes on different landscapes. However, this method has not been used in other country and wetland dynamic detection. In this study, we introduce CCDM method to check its efficiency in detecting wetland dynamic in the Northeast China and compared with traditional method (the change vector analysis and the tassled cap transformation ).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85900", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85901" } }
{"authors":"Hee Sung Chong::Yonsei University--Woogyung Kim::Yonsei University--Jhoon Kim::Yonsei University--Hana Lee::Yonsei University--Jung Hyun Kim::Yonsei University--Jiyoung KIM::Yonsei University--Jay Herman::University of Maryland Baltimore County--Nader Abuhassan::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Jeong-Hoo Park::NIER National Institute of Environmental Research--Sujung Go::Yonsei University--", "title":"A11G-0116: Characteristics of total column ozone and nitrogen dioxide amount over Korea during the 2015 MAPS campaign: Pandora spectrometer, satellite and in-situ measurement", "abstract":"To improve the performances of satellite retrieval of surface pollution and air quality models, NIER (National Institute of Environmental Research) and NASA are planning the KORUS-AQ campaign over the Korean Peninsula in May-June, 2016. As a pre-campaign of the KORUS-AQ, MAPS (Megacity Air Pollution Studies)-Seoul was conducted from May to July, 2015. During this campaign, six Pandora instruments continuously provided total column density of O3 and NO2 over Korea. These measurements will be continued until the end of 2016 covering the KORUS-AQ campaign period and beyond for the initial validation of TROPOMI measurements. To assess the variation of O3 and NO2, data were collected from Pandora, Dobson spectrophotometer, Brewer spectrophotometer, other ground-based in situ measurements and Ozone Monitoring Instrument (OMI). Ozone column density from Pandora exhibited significantly high correlation (R2 > 0.8) with the ground-based Dobson and Brewer spectrophotometers. Due to the detector anomaly and wide spatial pixel coverage, O3 values from OMI showed lower correlation (R2 > 0.6) with the Pandora. Even though six Pandoras were scattered across the country, O3 data showed similar distribution, in accordance with the low spatial variability of ozone. On the contrary, NO2 distribution pattern showed large difference at each site, which showed peak at around 10 a.m., with larger diurnal variability in urban area than that in rural area by more than 5 times. As most of Pandora sites do not have on-site in situ NO2 measurements, other in situ data from the nearest Air Korea stations were used for the comparison. The comparison result showed significant correlation, although, the correlation coefficient was relatively lower than that of O3. Pandora measurements agreed well with the ground based instruments and OMI satellite data with averaged residuals less than 2% in O3. In case of NO2 Pandora measurements showed similar trend with in situ measurements.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85901", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85902" } }
{"authors":"Mariano González-Roglich::Duke University--Jennifer Swenson::Duke University--", "title":"B41H-06: Carbon mapping of Argentine savannas: Using fractional tree cover to scale from field to region", "abstract":"Programs which intend to maintain or enhance carbon (C) stocks in natural ecosystems are promising, but require detailed and spatially explicit C distribution models to monitor the effectiveness of management interventions. Savanna ecosystems are significant components of the global C cycle, covering about one fifth of the global land mass, but they have received less attention in C monitoring protocols. Our goal was to estimate C storage across a broad savanna ecosystem using field surveys and freely available satellite images. We first mapped tree canopies at 2.5 m resolution with a spatial subset of high resolution panchromatic images to then predict regional wall-to-wall tree percent cover using 30-m Landsat imagery and the Random Forests algorithms. We found that a model with summer and winter spectral indices from Landsat, climate and topography performed best. Using a linear relationship between C and % tree cover, we then predicted tree C stocks across the gradient of tree cover, explaining 87 % of the variability. The spatially explicit validation of the tree C model with field-measured C-stocks revealed an RMSE of 8.2 tC/ha which represented ~30% of the mean C stock for areas with tree cover, comparable to studies based on more advanced remote sensing methods, such as LiDAR and RADAR. Sample spatial distribution highly affected the performance of the RF models in predicting tree cover, raising concerns regarding the predictive capabilities of the model in areas for which training data is not present. The 50,000 km2 has ~41 Tg C, which could be released to the atmosphere if agricultural pressure intensifies in this semiarid savanna.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85902", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85903" } }
{"authors":"Matthew Newman::University of Colorado at Boulder--", "title":"A23M-01: Diagnosing Changes in ENSO Variability and Predictability from Observations and Models", "abstract":"Recently, it has been suggested that the predictability of ENSO has changed in the last few decades, with reduced forecast skill in the 2000’s relative to earlier decades. We investigate this issue within the context of a statistically stationary stochastically forced multivariate linear dynamical system. Using a Linear Inverse Model (LIM) constructed from observed tropical Pacific oceanic and atmospheric anomalies, it is suggested that decadal changes in realized ENSO forecast skill (for both the LIM and the forecast models of the North American Multi Model Ensemble) may also reflect variations of noise and not necessarily a change in the underlying predictability of tropical Pacific coupled dynamics. That is, some ENSO events are inherently less predictable than others due to the relative importance of different physical processes (eg, surface or thermocline feedbacks) as initially excited by random weather forcing, and periods when such events are more often randomly excited will be periods of reduced forecast skill. A contrast is also drawn with a marked change in (perfect model) tropical Pacific predictability found between two extended simulations of the NCAR CESM1 coupled model, run under fixed 1850 and 2000 radiative forcing conditions, respectively. Diagnosis of surface and thermocline feedbacks in these models (as well as some CMIP5 models) shows how the potential ENSO predictability of some models may appear more sensitive to certain base state changes due to errors in these feedbacks. Finally, the observations-based LIM is used to show that the weak warm event evolution during 2014 was an expected consequence of a tropical Pacific thermocline anomaly that projected weakly on the optimal ENSO precursor, despite the corresponding relatively large equatorial Pacific domain-integrated warm water volume anomaly. In fact, repeating the 2014 LIM forecast by replacing the initial thermocline anomaly with that of spring 1997 yields pronounced warming. In contrast, initial conditions this year are much more consistent with a potentially large, and potentially predictable, 2015/16 event.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85903", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85904" } }
{"authors":"Rainer Luptowitz::University of California Riverside--Robert Allen::University of California Riverside--", "title":"A33G-0271: Large Uncertainty in Future Projections of Southwestern United States Precipitation through the 21st Century", "abstract":"Southwestern United States (SW US; 29-40 N, 235-255 E) 21st century precipitation projections have a large uncertainty across 43 models of the Coupled Modeled Intercomparison Project phase 5 (CMIP5) Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5 (RCP4.5), with some models projecting wetting and others projecting drying. They show a projected precipitation range for 2100 of -10.18% to +18.33% relative to Global Precipitation Climatology Project version 2.2 (GPCP 2.2) precipitation climatology. One model, the Community Atmosphere Model version 5 (CAM5), illustrates a robust drying trend for 2100 of -6.98% to -0.86% relative to GPCP 2.2 precipitation climatology. CAM5 simulations show most drying is related to future anthropogenic aerosol decreases. Future work will investigate reasons for the large uncertainty in CMIP5 future projections, which is likely related to large natural variability. We will also analyze mechanisms by which future anthropogenic aerosol decreases may contribute to 21st century SW US drying.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85904", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85905" } }
{"authors":"Bart De Pontieu::Lockheed Martin Solar and Astrophysics Laboratory--", "title":"SH31B-2408: Connections between heating processes in the chromosphere, transition region and low corona", "abstract":"We exploit the high spatio-temporal and spectral resolution of observations with the Interface Region Imaging Spectrograph (IRIS) and the Swedish Solar Telescope to investigate how chromospheric, transition region and coronal heating are connected, in particular in plage regions at the footpoints of hot coronal loops. We investigate the spatio-temporal properties of low chromospheric heating, as diagnosed with the Mg II h and k lines, and study their connection with moss emission, often used as a proxy for coronal heating. In addition, we show how chromospheric dynamic events such as jets impact the transition region and low corona.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85905", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85906" } }
{"authors":"Ai-ti Chen::National Taiwan University--Chuan-Chou Shen::NTU National Taiwan University--Ming Tan::CAS Chinese Academy of Sciences--Tingyong Li::Southwest University--Ryu Uemura::University of the Ryukyus--Ryuji Asami::University of the Ryukyus--", "title":"PP31A-2205: Helium Isotopes and Noble Gas Abundances of Cave Dripping Water in Three Caves in East Asia", "abstract":"Paleo-temperature recorded in nature archives is a critical parameter to understand climate change in the past. With advantages of unique inert chemical characteristics and sensitive solubilities with temperature, dissolved noble gases in speleothem inclusion water were recently proposed to retrieve terrestrial temperature history. In order to accurately apply this newly-developed speleothem noble gas temperature (NGT) as a reliable proxy, a fundamental issue about behaviors of noble gases in the karst should be first clarified. In this study, we measured noble gas contents in air and dripping water to evaluate any ratio deviation between noble gases. Cave dripping water samples was collected from three selected caves, Shihua Cave in northern China, Furong Cave in southwestern, and Gyukusen Cave in an island located in the western Pacific. For these caves are characterized by a thorough mixing and long-term storage of waters in a karst aquifer by the absence of seasonal oxygen isotope shifts. Ratios of dripping water noble gases are statistically insignificant from air data. Helium isotopic ratios in the dripping water samples match air value. The results indicate that elemental and isotopic signatures of noble gases from air can be frankly preserved in the epikarst and support the fidelity of NGT techniques.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85906", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85907" } }
{"authors":"Hichem Mezaoui::University of New Brunswick--", "title":"SA51A-2397: Characterization of The Ionospheric Scintillation at High Latitude Using GPS signal: Investigating the Behaviour of the Entropy of the Signal", "abstract":"Transionospheric radio signals experience both amplitude and phase variations as a result of propagation through a turbulent ionosphere; this phenomenon is known as ionospheric scintillations. As a result of these fluctuations, GPS receivers lose track of signals and consequently induce position and navigational errors. Therefore, there is a need to study these scintillations and their causes in order to not only resolve the navigational problem but in addition develop analytical and numerical radio propagation models. We investigate the multi-fractal structure of the turbulent ionospheric plasma by analyzing the L1 GPS signal at 50 Hz sampling rate using the Canadian High Arctic Ionospheric Network (CHAIN) measurements. We consider the power fluctuations of the signal. Differential signal is constructed for different time lags, the distribution of the differential signal is non-Gaussian, this is believed to be the result of the non-linearity of the system. In order to take into account the non-linear aspect we fit the Probability Density Function to the Castaing distribution, this latter allows the variance of the distribution to vary by assuming a log-normal distribution of the variance convoluted with a Gaussian distribution. The intermittency of the signal is considered by estimating the flatness of the distribution (or Kurtosis) that is the fourth normalized moment of the PDF. It has been found that the intermittency is predominant for small scales. The second problem tackled is the optimization of the detrending frequency which delimit the scintillation contribution from the slow variation of the signal due to the ionospheric background variability and the motion of the GPS satellite. In order to achieve this characterization we investigate the behavior of the entropy of the system for various temporal scales, this multi-scale analysis is performed using the wavelet analysis technique.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85907", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85908" } }
{"authors":"Stephane Hallegatte::World Bank--Mook Bangalore::World Bank--Adrien Vogt-Schilb::World Bank--", "title":"A14G-04: Socio-Economic Resilience to Floods in 90 Countries", "abstract":"Global losses from floods are increasing, with renewed calls for action to reduce their impact. In each country, region or city, many actions can protect the population and help rebuild and recover: building dikes and restoring mangroves; land-use planning; early warning and evacuation; insurance and social safety nets. What should be the priorities? How to build a comprehensive strategy? Is progress being made? We propose a tool – a national-level scorecard based on welfare economics – to assess a country’s socio-economic resilience to river floods and identify the most promising policy options in different contexts to reduce the impact of floods on well-being. The tool is applied to 90 countries using open databases, and can serve as a starting point for designing policies and more in-depth local studies.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85908", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85909" } }
{"authors":"Fangtian Shi::Peking University--Shaodong Xie::Peking University--", "title":"A21A-0099: Spatial variability and source apportionment of PM2.5 across multiple sampling locations in southwest China", "abstract":"The Chengdu Plain, which is located in the west of the Sichuan Basin, is the largest plain and the fastest-growing area in southwest China. The Chengdu Plain is considered one of the hotspot areas in China. The pollution pattern in this area is unique due to the hilly topography, humid and stagnant weather. To investigate the composition and major sources of the ambient PM2.5, a one-year observation was performed at five sites in the Chengdu Plain during August, 2013 to August, 2014. The five sites contained three urban background sites and two rural background sites. Samples were analyzed for major water-soluble ions, organic carbon (OC), element carbon (EC), and trace elements. The Positive Matrix Factorization (PMF) receptor model based on the combined data from five locations was applied to identify and quantify the likely sources. The annual mean mass concentration of PM2.5 in Chengdu Plain was 81 μg·m-3 with the maximum in winter and the minimum in summer. Eight main factors were identified for the PM2.5 fraction: vehicle emission, secondary nitrate, biomass burning and waste incineration emission, secondary sulfate, Mo-related manufacturing, fugitive dust, coal combustion and industry pollution. The five-site annual mean contributions of each source were 13%, 19%, 9%, 25%, 2%, 13%, 9% and 10%,respectively, to PM2.5, while exhibiting large spatial variability. The contribution of secondary sulfate to the PM2.5 mass was largest at all sites, indicating severe secondary pollution in the region. Biomass burning and waste incineration emission made larger proportion at rural sites than that of urban sites, while the vehicle emission was larger at urban sites. The Enrichment factors for Cd, Zn, Pb, As, Cu and Mo in PM2.5 were larger than 100 indicated that those elements were largely from anthropogenic origins. Cd, As and Cu can mainly originate from nonferrous metal industry, while Mo may mainly generated from ferromolybdenum and Mo powder manufacture. The contribution of Mo-related manufacturing profile was largest at a rural site which is located in the north of the Chengdu Plain, where several small-scale Mo metal processing factories scattered around. The analysis of the combined data from five sites helped to study the common origins affecting the whole area and the spatial variability of the different locations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85909", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85910" } }
{"authors":"Peter Martin::California Institute of Technology--Kenneth Farley::JPL/NASA/Caltech--Doug Archer::Jacobs Technology, NASA Johnson Space Center--Sushil Atreya::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Pamela Conrad::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Jennifer Eigenbrode::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Alberto Fairen::Cornell University--Heather Franz::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Caroline Freissinet::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Daniel Glavin::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Paul Mahaffy::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Charles Malespin::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Douglas Ming::NASA Johnson Space Center--Rafael Navarro-Gonzalez::Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico--Brad Sutter::Jacobs Technology, NASA Johnson Space Center--", "title":"P43B-2130: Stable Isotope Systematics of Martian Perchlorate", "abstract":"Chlorine isotopic compositions in HCl released during evolved gas analysis (EGA) runs have been detected by the Sample Analysis at Mars (SAM) instrument on the Curiosity rover ranging from approximately -9‰ to -50‰ δ37Cl, with two spatially and isotopically separated groups of samples averaging -15‰ and -45‰. These extremely low values are the first such detection of any known natural material; common terrestrial values very rarely exceed ±5‰, and the most extreme isotopic signature yet detected elsewhere in the solar system are values of around +24‰ on the Moon. The only other known location in the solar system with large negative chlorine isotopes is the Atacama Desert, where perchlorate with -14‰ δ37Cl has been detected. The Atacama perchlorate has unusual Δ17O signatures associated with it, indicating a formation mechanism involving O3, which suggests an atmospheric origin of the perchlorate and associated large isotopic anomalies. Identification of non-zero positive Δ17O signatures in the O2 released during EGA runs would allow definitive evidence for a similar process having occurred on Mars. Perchlorate is thought to be the most likely source of HCl in EGA runs due to the simultaneous onset of O2 release. If perchlorate is indeed the HCl source, atmospheric chemistry could be responsible for the observed isotopic anomalies, with variable extents of perchlorate production producing the isotopic variability. However, chloride salts have also been observed to release HCl upon heating; if the timing of O2 release is merely coincidental, observed HCl could be coming from chlorides. At thermodynamic equilibrium, the fractionation factor of perchlorate reduction is 0.93, meaning that differing amounts of post-deposition reduction of isotopically normal perchlorate to chloride could account for the highly variable Cl isotopes. Additionally, post-deposition reduction could account for the difference between the two Cl isotopic groups if perchlorate is the HCl source, as the residual perchlorate after reduction will be isotopically heavy. Therefore, conclusive determination of the origin of HCl released during EGA is vital to understanding the origin of this large δ37Cl anomaly.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85910", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85912" } }
{"authors":"Shobha Sriharan::Virginia State University--Laren Robinson::Virginia State University--Nasser Ghariban::Virginia State University--Marcus Comar::Virginia State University--Batreda Pope::Virginia State University--Greg Frey::USDA Forest Service--", "title":"B33E-0779: Geospatial Technologies and i-Tree Echo Inventory for Predicting Climate Change on Urban Environment", "abstract":"Urban forests can be useful both in mitigating climate change and in helping cities adapt to higher temperatures and other impacts of climate change. Understanding and managing the impacts of climate change on the urban forest trees and natural communities will help us maintain their environmental, cultural, and economic benefits. Tree Inventory can provide important information on tree species, height, crown width, overall condition, health and maintenance needs. This presentation will demonstrate that a trees database system is necessary for developing a sustainable urban tree program. Virginia State University (VSU) campus benefits from large number and diversity of trees that are helping us by cleaning the air, retaining water, and providing shade on the buildings to reduce energy cost. The objectives of this study were to develop campus inventory of the trees, identify the tree species, map the locations of the trees with user-friendly tools such as i-Tree Eco and geospatial technologies by assessing the cost/benefit of employing student labor for training and ground validation of the results, and help campus landscape managers implement adaptive responses to climate change impacts. Data was collected on the location, species, and size of trees by using i-Tree urban forestry analysis software. This data was transferred to i-Tree inventory system for demonstrating types of trees, diameter of the trees, height of the trees, and vintage of the trees. The study site was mapped by collecting waypoints with GPS (Global Positioning System) at the trees and uploading these waypoints in ArcMap. The results of this study showed that: (i) students make good field crews, (ii) if more trees were placed in the proper area, the heating and cooling costs will reduce, and (iii) trees database system is necessary for planning, designing, planting, and maintenance, and removal of campus trees Research sponsored by the NIFA Grant, “Urban Forestry Management” (2012-38821-20153).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85912", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85913" } }
{"authors":"Zena Jensvold::University of Oregon--Qusheng Jin::University of Oregon--", "title":"B33B-0661: Biogeochemical metabolic modeling of methanogenesis by Methanosarcina barkeri", "abstract":"Methanogenesis, the biological process of methane production, is the final step of natural organic matter degradation. In studying natural methanogenesis, important questions include how fast methanogenesis proceeds and how methanogens adapt to the environment. To address these questions, we propose a new approach – biogeochemical reaction modeling – by simulating the metabolic networks of methanogens. Biogeochemical reaction modeling combines geochemical reaction modeling and genome-scale metabolic modeling. Geochemical reaction modeling focuses on the speciation of electron donors and acceptors in the environment, and therefore the energy available to methanogens. Genome-scale metabolic modeling predicts microbial rates and metabolic strategies. Specifically, this approach describes methanogenesis using an enzyme network model, and computes enzyme rates by accounting for both the kinetics and thermodynamics. The network model is simulated numerically to predict enzyme abundances and rates of methanogen metabolism. We applied this new approach to Methanosarcina barkeri strain fusaro, a model methanogen that makes methane by reducing carbon dioxide and oxidizing dihydrogen. The simulation results match well with the results of previous laboratory experiments, including the magnitude of proton motive force and the kinetic parameters of Methanosarcina barkeri. The results also predict that in natural environments, the configuration of methanogenesis network, including the concentrations of enzymes and metabolites, differs significantly from that under laboratory settings.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85913", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85914" } }
{"authors":"Christina Riesselman::University of Otago--Briar Taylor-Silva::University of Otago--", "title":"PP21B-2251: Diatom and Geochemical Constraints on Pliocene Sea Surface Conditions on the Wilkes Land Margin, East Antarctica", "abstract":"The mid-Pliocene is the most recent interval in Earth’s history to sustain global temperatures within the range of warming predicted for the 21st century, providing an appealing analog with which to examine the changes we might encounter in the coming century. Diatom-based Southern Ocean sea surface and sea ice reconstructions by the USGS Pliocene Research Interpretations and Synoptic Mapping (PRISM) Group suggest an average +2° summer SST anomaly during the 3.3-3.0 Ma interval relative to modern. Here, we present a reconstruction of Pliocene sea surface conditions from a marine sediment core collected at IODP Site U1361, on the continental rise of the Wilkes Land margin. U1361 biogenic silica concentrations document the alternation of diatom-rich and diatom-poor lithologies; we interpret 8 diatom-rich mudstones within this sequence to record interglacial conditions between 3.8 and 2.8 Ma, across the transition from obliquity control to precession control on East Antarctic ice volumes. This progression also preserves 3 packages of interglacial sediments within the 3.3-3.0 PRISM interval, providing an opportunity for direct comparison to proximal PRISM site Eltanin 50-28. Diatom assemblages in both cores are characterized by Fragilariopsis barronii and Rouxia antarctica, extinct species with an inferred ecological preference for waters south of the polar front. However F. weaveri, an extinct diatom with inferred preference for more northerly waters and moderate abundance in E50-28, has not been identified at U1361. This may indicate that the polar frontal zone migrated across E50-28 (62° 54’S) but remained north of U1361 (64° 25’S) during the mid-Pliocene. This interpretation is bolstered by the low abundance of extant polar front species (e.g., Thalassiosira oliverana, T. lentiginosa) at U1361; these diatoms dominate the E50-28 assemblage. In contrast, the U1361 assemblage includes a number of extant sea ice indicators (F. sublinearis, F. curta, Chaetoceros resting spores) that are rare or absent in E50-28. Ongoing work seeks to place the U1361 PRISM interval in the context of a longer record, to examine whether the 3.3 Ma onset of cooling in the Ross Sea, identified from ANDRILL sediments, is also recorded on the East Antarctic margin.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85914", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85915" } }
{"authors":"Qianwen Luo::Purdue University--Wen-wen Tung::Purdue Univ--", "title":"A33G-0272: The Cloud-Radiative Forcing of North American landfalling Atmospheric Rivers", "abstract":"Atmospheric Rivers (ARs) are narrow elongated regions with strong horizontal water vapor flux associated with extratropical cyclones. Upon making landfall, conspicuous mid-to-high-latitude stratiform cloud decks with high reflectivity are observed along with the ARs in satellite imagery. The cloud-radiative forcing (CRF) associated with these clouds has only been preliminarily established (e.g., Luo and Tung 2015). Their climatological impacts are not understood, yet the related cloud microphysics and radiation processes are poorly represented in global climate models. We studied the correlations between observed variables including the ECMWF-Interim horizontal water vapor fluxes (IVT) integrated from 1000—300 hPa, CERES-derived cloud water path and CRF, and MODIS cirrus reflectance before, during, and after the ARs impinged on the southwest and northwest coasts of North America (NA) in Nov—March, 2000–2008, with 60 ARs affecting the southwest coast (southwest ARs), and 60 ARs affecting the northwest coast (northwest ARs, Dettinger et al., 2011). Anomalies were calculated by subtracting the average over all time steps. For the southwest ARs, a significant increase of ice clouds took place around the landfalling regions with IVT anomalies >130 kg/m/s on landfalling day-1 and day+0. On day+1, a substantial increase of ice clouds with 50% reduction of IVT anomalies was found along with the ARs. On day+2 to day+3, positive IVT anomalies existed over the central and eastern US. These anomalies could be attributed to the southwest ARs and the secondary ARs that rooted in the Gulf of Mexico and made landfall over central and eastern US. Many parts of the NA continent were covered under ice cloud decks. The IVT anomalies for the northwest ARs were >250 kg/m/s on day-1 to day+0, and approximately 120 kg/m/s on day+1. Nevertheless, the northwest ARs were not observed to make landfall concurrently with the secondary landfalling ARs from the Gulf of Mexico. Only a small part of the NA continent was covered by a slight increase of ice clouds along with the ARs on day+1 to day+3. Differences in the amount and spatial distribution of continental ice clouds in different AR scenarios thereby imply different regional CRF; such implications will be further discussed at time scales relevant to climate processes in the presentation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85915", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85916" } }
{"authors":"Luis Rivera::Organization Not Listed--Concepcion Rodriguez::Para La Naturaleza--", "title":"GC33A-1251: Rio Bauta Abajo, Orocovis, Puerto Rico Monitoring: Citizen Science in Action", "abstract":"“Conoce tu rio” (Learn about your river) is a Citizen Science-“Para La Naturaleza” Project with the purpose of providing citizens effective monitoring methods for water quality and macro invertebrates. Through the monthly monitoring of Rio Grande de Manatí watershed in Puerto Rico, volunteers gained the knowledge and skills necessary to conduct the same methodology in other rivers of Puerto Rico. This is the case of the Rio Bauta Abajo-Orocovis group, initiated by a volunteer of “Conoce tu Rio”. The new group has the objective of monitoring the water quality, shrimps and other macro invertebrate diversity and abundance in a stream reach of Rio Bauta Abajo, Orocovis, Puerto Rico. The group is also part of the EPA Equipment Loan Program for Pathogen and Water Quality Monitoring. Shrimps and macro invertebrates are captured using nets. In this ongoing project, preliminary results show that 5 of the 17 shrimp species of Puerto Rico and the freshwater crab have been captured in the monitoring point of Rio Bauta Abajo. The most abundant species captured was Atya scabra representing 70% of the abundance. The second most abundant species was Xiphocaris elongata representing 20% of the abundance. We also found a large number of gravid females of two shrimp species. Sixty percent of captured Atya scabra were gravid while 100% of the captured Xiphocaris elongata were gravid. Water quality is within the standard except for phosphorous and nitrogen. The most abundant species inhabit different habitats in the river. Atya scabra is found in the riffles and Xiphocaris elongata is found in the stream borders and or pools. The high number of gravid females suggests that the dry season is the reproductive season for this two species. The high concentration of phosphorous and nitrogen suggest that in the area there area either crops of animals facilities whose runoff is getting to the river. This monitoring group expects to continue motivating citizens to monitor the water quality in other rivers of Puerto Rico, to raise awareness about the conservation of the rivers and to disseminate the results of their study to the general public and the government agencies. Puerto Rico is suffering a drought and this is a critical moment to raise awareness about the conservation of the water resources and its flora and fauna.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85916", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85917" } }
{"authors":"Bradley Rutherford::Montana Tech of The University of Montana--Marvin Speece::Montana Tech of The University of Montana--Kurt Constenius::University of Arizona--", "title":"T13C-3012: Geophysical Evidence for the Tectonic Evolution of the Inverted Belt-Purcell Basin, Northwestern Montana", "abstract":"The geometry of the Precambrian Belt-Purcell basin and subsequent allochthon, that dominates the geology of northwestern Montana, played a critical role in the development of compressional structures during orogenesis and their ensuing reactivation during the later phase of extensional collapse. Five reprocessed seismic reflection profiles provide images in the Swan Range and adjacent valleys that we have correlated to published seismic data north into Canada. Reflections from syndepositional sills encased within Lower Belt rocks offer clues to the configuration of the basin prior to its tectonic inversion. Thick basinal facies of the Lewis salient are contrasted by thin shelfal facies found in hanging wall rocks of frontal Belt carrying thrusts south of the salient. The along strike change in hanging wall rocks reflects the original configuration of the Belt basin margin. Rocks of the Lewis salient were deposited in an embayment on the northeastern margin of the Belt basin. Shelfal accumlations of the embayment comprise an autochthonous wedge that has remained in the footwall of the Lewis thrust system. South of the embayment and related salient, nearly the entire Belt basin was detached from pre-Belt crystalline rocks and inverted at the latitude of the Sawtooth Range. Deeply exhumed Phanerozoic rocks of the Sawtooth Range are a direct consequence of the thin wedge geometry of the detached basin south of the Lewis salient that required growth of a substantial orogenic wedge to obtain critical taper values. We offer an alternate interpretation of a >10 km high, west facing décollement ramp that coincides with the Belt-Purcell basin margin. Previous interpretations in Montana have inferred the location of the basin margin ramp to approximate the trace of the Purcell Anticlinorium. Seismic data and cross-section balancing suggest the Rocky Mountain Trench as a more accurate location. Based on our proposed position of the basin margin the Belt-Purcell allocthon requires insignificant rotation during thrust emplacement which is in agreement with published interpretations of paleomagnetic data. We suggest small (<5°) clockwise rotation is due to an increase in extensional slip from the international border south to the Flathead Valley as opposed to an increase in compressional shortening to the north.The geometry of the Precambrian Belt-Purcell basin and subsequent allochthon, that dominates the geology of northwestern Montana, played a critical role in the development of compressional structures during orogenesis and their ensuing reactivation during the later phase of extensional collapse. Five reprocessed seismic reflection profiles provide images in the Swan Range and adjacent valleys that we have correlated to published seismic data north into Canada. Reflections from syndepositional sills encased within Lower Belt rocks offer clues to the configuration of the basin prior to its tectonic inversion. Thick basinal facies of the Lewis salient are contrasted by thin shelfal facies found in hanging wall rocks of frontal Belt carrying thrusts south of the salient. The along strike change in hanging wall rocks reflects the original configuration of the Belt basin margin. Rocks of the Lewis salient were deposited in an embayment on the northeastern margin of the Belt basin. Shelfal accumlations of the embayment comprise an autochthonous wedge that has remained in the footwall of the Lewis thrust system. South of the embayment and related salient, nearly the entire Belt basin was detached from pre-Belt crystalline rocks and inverted at the latitude of the Sawtooth Range. Deeply exhumed Phanerozoic rocks of the Sawtooth Range are a direct consequence of the thin wedge geometry of the detached basin south of the Lewis salient that required growth of a substantial orogenic wedge to obtain critical taper values. We offer an alternate interpretation of a >10 km high, west facing décollement ramp that coincides with the Belt-Purcell basin margin. Previous interpretations in Montana have inferred the location of the basin margin ramp to approximate the trace of the Purcell Anticlinorium. Seismic data and cross-section balancing suggest the Rocky Mountain Trench as a more accurate location. Based on our proposed position of the basin margin the Belt-Purcell allocthon requires insignificant rotation during thrust emplacement which is in agreement with published interpretations of paleomagnetic data. We suggest small (<5°) clockwise rotation is due to an increase in extensional slip from the international border south to the Flathead Valley as opposed to an increase in compressional shortening to the north.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85917", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85918" } }
{"authors":"Yusong Wang::University of Iowa--", "title":"H33D-1653: An Interactive Real-time Decision Support System for Leachate Irrigation on Evapotranspiration Landfill Covers", "abstract":"Landfill disposal is still the most common and economical practice for municipal solid waste in most countries. However, heavily polluted leachate generated by excess rainwater percolating through the landfill waste is the major drawback of this practice. Evapotranspiration (ET) cover systems are increasingly being used as alternative cover systems to minimize percolation by evapotranspiration. Leachate recirculation is one of the least expensive options for leachate treatment. The combination of ET cover systems and leachate recirculation can be an economical and environment-friendly practice for landfill leachate management. An interactive real-time decision support system is being developed to better manage leachate irrigation using historical and forecasting weather data, and real time soil moisture data. The main frame of this system includes soil water modules, and plant-soil modules. An inverse simulation module is also included to calibrate certain parameters based on observed data when necessary. It would be an objectives-oriented irrigation management tool to minimize landfill operation costs and negative environmental impacts.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85918", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85919" } }
{"authors":"Lindsey Belliveau::Organization Not Listed--William Ouimet::University of Connecticut--Yu-Chang Chan::Academia Sinica--Timothy Byrne::University of Connecticut--", "title":"T53A-07: Exploring Controls on Sinuousity, Terraces and River Capture in the Upper Dajia River, Taiwan", "abstract":"Taiwan is one of the most tectonically active regions in the world and is prone to landslides due to steep topography, large earthquakes and frequent typhoons. Landslides often affect and alter the river valleys beneath them, producing knickpoints on longitudinal river profiles, segmenting valleys into mixed bedrock–alluvial rivers and affecting river incision for tens to thousands of years. This study investigates the origin and evolution of complex channel morphologies, terraces and river capture along a 20km stretch of the Upper Da-Jia River in the Heping area of Taiwan. Through GIS analysis and field studies, we explore controls on river channel sinuousity, terrace development and river capture in relation to tectonic and climatic forcing, rock erodibility and landslides. High channel sinuousity is proposed as the result of a coupling between bank erosion and landslides. We discuss three types of landslide-induced meanders and increased sinuousity: (a) depositional-push meanders, (b) failure-zone erosional meanders, and (c) complex-erosional meanders. We also investigate spatial variation in channel morphology (slope, width) and the distribution and heights of river terraces within the Upper Da-Jia watershed associated with periods of widespread valley filling from landslide activity. Examples of river capture provide further evidence of the dynamic interactions between river incision, landslides and associated changes in channel morphology and terrace development within steep rapidly uplift, eroding and evolving mountain belts.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85919", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85920" } }
{"authors":"Jieun Park::KEI Korea Environment Institute KEI Korea Environment Institute--Young-Cheol Jeong::KEI Korea Environment Institute--Ki-eun Kim::Seoul National University--Dongsoo Lee::Seoul National University--Keunje Yoo::KEI Korea Environment Institute--Jaehoon Kim::Greenecos--Sangil Hwang::KEI Korea Environment Institute--", "title":"H43F-1571: A Preliminary Study for Chemical Ranking System in Terms of Soil and Groundwater Contamination by Chemical Accidents", "abstract":"A variety of chemicals could affect human health and ecosystems by chemical accidents such as fire, explosion, and/or spill. Chemical accidents make chemicals spread to the environment via various routes such as dispersion into ambient air, soil, and surface/ground water media. Especially, soil and groundwater contamination by chemical accidents become a secondary source to have a long term effect on human health and environment. Strength of long term effect by soil and groundwater contamination depends largely on inherent characteristics of a chemical and its fate in soil and groundwater. Therefore, in this study, we developed a framework on how to determine what kind of chemicals is more important in management scheme in terms of soil and groundwater contamination during chemical accidents. We ranked approximately fifty chemicals using this framework which takes into account an exposure into soil and groundwater, toxicity, persistence, and bioaccumulation of a chemical. This framework helps to prepare systematically the management plan for chemical related facilities. Furthermore, results from our study can make a policy maker have interests in highly ranked chemicals and facilities.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85920", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85921" } }
{"authors":"Leung Tsang::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Tianlin Wang::University of Washington--Joel Johnson::Ohio State University Main Campus--Kenneth Jezek::Ohio State University Main Campus--Shurun Tan::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--", "title":"C41D-0764: Modeling the Effects of Multi-layer Surface Roughness on 0.5 -2 GHz Passive Microwave Observations of the Greenland and Antarctic Ice Sheets", "abstract":"The Ultra-Wideband Software-Defined Radiometer (UWBRAD) is being developed to provide measurements of ice sheet thermal emission over the frequency range 0.5-2 GHz. In this frequency range, density variations within the firn create a layered structure that cause reflections. The thicknesses of the layers are of the order of centimeters in the top 100 meters, so that there can be hundreds to thousands of layers. In the incoherent approach of modelling, the radiative transfer equation is applied to each layer. In the coherent approach, the fluctuation dissipation theorem with a layered medium Green’s function is used to calculate the brightness temperature. However, layer roughness effects have not been accounted for. Rough surface scattering would cause coupling of the intensities in all directions and coupling between vertical and horizontal polarizations. We use a “partially coherent” approach. The snow firn is divided into “blocks” that include multiple layers separated by rough interfaces. The block size is defined such that a coherent incident wave will be attenuated to approximately 50% of its original amplitude upon transmission through the block. Within the block, we treat the wave scattering by rough surfaces coherently by using use the 2nd order small perturbation method (SPM2). The SPM2 is an efficient analytic method that obeys energy conservation. The block size can be as small as 10 meters for the top layers because of strong density fluctuations, but can be hundreds of meters deeper within the snow firn because of the smaller density variations at greater depths. We calculate the bistatic scattering and transmission coefficients for each block. Finally the scattering and emission from multiple blocks are combined incoherently by using a cascade approach of the input and output intensities of the block. Using the partially coherent approach, we can obtain the brightness temperatures of layered snow firn when there are hundreds or thousands of layers with hundreds or thousands of rough interfaces. Model predictions of brightness temperatures and their variations with observation angle, polarization, and frequency will be shown in the presentation. Implications of these results for future remote sensing studies of ice sheet thermal mission and temperature profile retrieval will also be discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85921", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85922" } }
{"authors":"Ho-Jin Lim::Kyungpook National University--Jun-Hyun Park::Kyungpook National University--Zaeem Babar::Kyungpook National University--", "title":"A41A-0035: Elemental Composition Analysis to Investigate NOx Effects on Secondary Organic Aerosol from α-Pinene Using Ultrahigh Resolution Mass Spectrometry", "abstract":"Secondary organic aerosol (SOA) accounts for 20-70% of atmospheric fine aerosol. NOx plays crucial roles in SOA formation and consequently affects the composition and yield of SOA. SOA component speciation is incomplete due to its complex composition of polar oxygenated and multifunctional species. In this study, ultrahigh resolution mass spectrometry (UHR MS) was applied to improve the understanding of NOx effects on biogenic SOA formation by identifying the elemental composition of SOA. Additional research aim was to investigate oligomer components that are considered as a driving force for SOA formation and growth. In this study α-pinene SOA from photochemical reaction was examined. SOA formation was performed in the absence and presence of NOx at dry condition (<5% RH) of room temperature (~25oC) in ~8 m3 KNU smog chamber. SOA was collected on Teflon-coated glass fiber filter, which was extracted using acetonitrile and analyzed by ultrahigh resolution 15T FT-ICR MS. UHR MS data were interpreted in various ways including molecular formula, Kendrick diagram, van Krevelen diagram, and double bond equivalent values. Substantially large fractions of them are nitrogen containing species. Thousands of individual species of SOA were identified. For SOA in the absence of NOx. intensity normalized mean O/C, H/C, N/C, OM/OC ratios were 0.43, 1.52, 0.02, and 1.68, respectively. For SOA in the presence of NOx, those ratios were 0.52, 0.95, 0.08, and 1.48, respectively. 4 different oligomer formation mechanisms (addition, H abstraction, hydrolysis and de-hydrolysis reaction) were examined on the basis of SOA compositions. Detailed discussion will be presented on the molecular structure and building block of oligomers in SOA as well as the evolution of individual elemental composition by multi-generation reactions. This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MEST) (No. 2011-01350000).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85922", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85923" } }
{"authors":"Won Chang::University of Chicago--Michael Stein::University of Chicago--Jiali Wang::Argonne National Laboratory--Veerabhadra Kotamarthi::Argonne National Laboratory--Elisabeth Moyer::University of Chicago--", "title":"A51E-0114: Simulating Future Changes in Spatio-temporal Precipitation by Identifying and Characterizing Individual Rainstorm Events", "abstract":"A growing body of literature suggests that human-induced climate change may cause significant changes in precipitation patterns, which could in turn influence future flood levels and frequencies and water supply and management practices. Although climate models produce full three-dimensional simulations of precipitation, analyses of model precipitation have focused either on time-averaged distributions or on individual timeseries with no spatial information. We describe here a new approach based on identifying and characterizing individual rainstorms in either data or model output. Our approach enables us to readily characterize important spatio-temporal aspects of rainstorms including initiation location, intensity (mean and patterns), spatial extent, duration, and trajectory. We apply this technique to high-resolution precipitation over the continental U.S. both from radar-based observations (NCEP Stage IV QPE product, 1-hourly, 4 km spatial resolution) and from model runs with dynamical downscaling (WRF regional climate model, 3-hourly, 12 km spatial resolution). In the model studies we investigate the changes in storm characteristics under a business-as-usual warming scenario to 2100 (RCP 8.5). We find that in these model runs, rainstorm intensity increases as expected with rising temperatures (approximately 7%/K, following increased atmospheric moisture content), while total precipitation increases by a lesser amount (3%/K), consistent with other studies. We identify for the first time the necessary compensating mechanism: in these model runs, individual precipitation events become smaller. Other aspects are approximately unchanged in the warmer climate. Because these spatio-temporal changes in rainfall patterns would impact regional hydrology, it is important that they be accurately incorporated into any impacts assessment. For this purpose we have developed a methodology for producing scenarios of future precipitation that combine observational data and model-projected changes. We statistically describe the future changes in rainstorm characteristics suggested by the WRF model and apply those changes to observational data. The resulting high spatial and temporal resolution scenarios have immediate applications for impacts assessment and adaptation studies.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85923", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85924" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"H21G-1472: Evaluation of pharmaceuticals removal by sewage sludge-derived adsorbents with rapid small-scale column tests", "abstract":"New composite adsorbents were developed by pyrolyzing sewage sludge and fish waste (75:25 or 90:10 dry mass ratio) at 650 oC and 950 oC. Batch adsorption experiments demonstrated that the composite adsorbents were able to adsorb a wide range of organic contaminants (volatile organic compounds, pharmaceuticals and endocrine disrupting compounds (EDCs), and nitrosamine disinfection byproducts) with high capacities. Here we further examine the performance of the adsorbents for the simultaneous removal of 8 pharmaceuticals and EDCs with rapid small-scale column tests (RSSCT). Results show that the order of breakthrough in RSSCT is in general consistent with the affinity determined via batch tests. As expected, the maximum amount of adsorption for each compound obtained from RSSCT is identical to or less than that obtained from batch tests (with only one exception), due to adsorption kinetics. However, despite the very different input concentration (1 mg/L vs. 100 mg/L) and contact time (2 min empty bed contact time vs. 16 hour equilibrium time) used in RSSCT and batch tests, the maximum amount of pharmaceuticals and EDCs adsorbed under RSSCT is still about one half of that under equilibrium batch tests, validating the approach of using batch tests with much higher input concentrations to determine adsorption capacities. Results of a pilot-scale column test in a drinking water treatment plant for pharmaceuticals removal will also be presented.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85924", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85925" } }
{"authors":"Ali Almomin::Stanford University--Biondo Biondi::Stanford University--", "title":"S12B-05: Simultaneous Inversion of Full Data Bandwidth by Tomographic Full Waveform Inversion", "abstract":"The convergence of full-waveform inversion can be improved by extending the velocity model along either the subsurface-offset axis or the time-lag axis. The extension of the velocity model along the time-lag axis enables us to linearly model large time shifts caused by velocity perturbations. This linear modeling was based on a new linearization of the scalar wave equation in which perturbation of the extended slowness squared was convolved in time with the second time derivative of the background wavefield. The linearization was accurate for reflected events and transmitted events. We determined that it can effectively model conventional reflection data as well as modern long-offset data containing diving waves. It also enabled the simultaneous inversion of reflections and diving waves, even when the starting velocity model was far from being accurate. We solved the optimization problem related to the inversion with a nested algorithm. The inner iterations were based on the proposed linearization and on a mixing of scales between the short- and long-wavelength components of the velocity model. We significantly improved the convergence rate by preconditioning the extended model to balance the amplitude-versus-angle behavior of the wave-equation and by imposing wavelength continuation of the gradient in the outer loop. Numerical tests performed on synthetic data modeled on the Marmousi model and on Chevron’s FWI blind-test data demonstrated the global convergence properties as well as the high-resolution potential of the proposed method.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85925", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85926" } }
{"authors":"Alexandra Ahern::Brigham Young University--Jani Radebaugh::Brigham Young University--Eric Christiansen::Brigham Young University--Ronald Harris::Brigham Young University--", "title":"P31C-2073: Structural Mapping of Paterae and Mountains on Io: Implications for Crustal Stresses and Feature Evolution", "abstract":"Paterae and mountains are some of the most distinguishing and well-distributed surface features on Io, and they reveal the role of tectonism in Io’s crust. Paterae, similar to calderas, are volcano-tectonic collapse features that often have straight margins. Io’s mountains are some of the highest in the solar system and contain linear features that reveal crustal stresses. Paterae and mountains are often found adjacent to one another, suggesting possible genetic relationships. We have produced twelve detailed regional structural maps from high-resolution images of relevant features, where available, as well as a global structural map from the Io Global Color Mosaic. The regional structural maps identify features such as fractures, lineations, folds, faults, and mass wasting scarps, which are then interpreted in the context of global and regional stress regimes. A total of 1048 structural lineations have been identified globally. Preliminary analyses of major thrust and normal fault orientations are dominantly 90° offset from each other, suggesting the maximum contractional stresses leading to large mountain formation are not a direct result of tidal extension. Rather, these results corroborate the model of volcanic loading of the crust and global shortening, leading to thrust faulting and uplift of coherent crustal blocks. Several paterae, such as Hi’iaka and Tohil, are found adjacent to mountains inside extensional basins where lava has migrated up normal faults to erupt onto patera floors. Over time, mass wasting and volcanic resurfacing can change mountains from young, steep, and angular peaks to older, gentler, and more rounded hills. Mass wasting scarps make up 53% of all features identified. The structural maps highlight the significant effect of mass wasting on Io’s surface, the evolution of mountains through time, the role of tectonics in the formation of paterae, and the formation of mountains through global contraction due to volcanism.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85926", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85928" } }
{"authors":"Lisa White::University of California Berkeley--Diane Maygarden::University of New Orleans--Laura Serpa::Univ. of Texas at El Paso--", "title":"ED23A-0851: Preparing Future Geoscientists at the Critical High School-to-College Junction: Project METALS and the Value of Engaging Diverse Institutions to Serve Underrepresented Students", "abstract":"Since 2010, the Minority Education Through Traveling and Learning in the Sciences (METALS) program, a collaboration among San Francisco State Univ., the Univ. of Texas at El Paso, the Univ. of New Orleans, and Purdue Univ., has created meaningful, field-based geoscience experiences for underrepresented minority high school students. METALS activities promote excitement about geoscience in field settings and foster mutual respect and trust among participants of different backgrounds and ethnicities. These gains are strengthened by the collective knowledge of the university partners and by faculty, graduate and undergraduate students, scientists, and science teachers who guide the field trips and who are committed to encouraging diversity in the geosciences. Through the student experiences it provides, METALS has helped shape and shift student attitudes and orientation toward geoscience, during and beyond their field experience, just as these students are poised at the critical juncture from high school to college. A review of the METALS findings and summative evaluation shows a distinct pattern of high to moderately high impact on most students in the various cohorts of the program. METALS, overall, was perceived by participants as a program that: (1) opens up opportunities for individuals who might not typically be able to experience science in outdoor settings; (2) offers high-interest geology content in field contexts, along with social and environmental connections; (3) promotes excitement about geology while encouraging the development of mutual respect, interdependence, and trust among individuals of different ethnicities; (4) influences the academic choices of students, in particular their choice of major and course selection in college. Summative data show that multiple aspects of this program were highly effective. Cross-university collaborations create a dynamic forum and a high-impact opportunity for students from different backgrounds to meet and develop friendships. Such collaborations also expose students to a network of professionals and mentors who can help them navigate career and educational paths. Taken as a whole, the results of the program and our evaluations suggest that the multi-university character of METALS is particularly beneficial for both students and mentors.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85928", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85929" } }
{"authors":"Liangsheng Shi::Wuhan University--", "title":"H13A-1471: Impacts of Different Types of Measurements on Estimating Unsaturatedflow Parameters", "abstract":"This study evaluates the value of different types of measurements for estimating soil hydraulic parameters. A numerical method based on ensemble Kalman filter (EnKF) is presented to solely or jointly assimilate point-scale soil water head data, point-scale soil water content data, surface soil water content data and groundwater level data. This study investigates the performance of EnKF under different types of data, the potential worth contained in these data, and the factors that may affect estimation accuracy. Results show that for all types of data, smaller measurements errors lead to faster convergence to the true values. Higher accuracy measurements are required to improve the parameter estimation if a large number of unknown parameters need to be identified simultaneously. The data worth implied by the surface soil water content data and groundwater level data is prone to corruption by a deviated initial guess. Surface soil moisture data are capable of identifying soil hydraulic parameters for the top layers, but exert less or no influence on deeper layers especially when estimating multiple parameters simultaneously. Groundwater level is one type of valuable information to infer the soil hydraulic parameters. However, based on the approach used in this study, the estimates from groundwater level data may suffer severe degradation if a large number of parameters must be identified. Combined use of two or more types of data is helpful to improve the parameter estimation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85929", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85930" } }
{"authors":"Zhengtang Guo::Institute of Geology and Geophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences--", "title":"EP43A-0958: Assessing the Pleistocene hemispheric climate links through correlating loess, marine and ice-core records", "abstract":"Near continuous loess-soil records in China cover the past 22 million years. Here, we compare various independent climate proxies from the terrestrial, marine and ice-core domains to re-evaluate the regional and global significance of the China loess with special emphases to the Quaternary portion. The results confirm that the intensity of loess deposition in China is closely coupled with the northern high latitude climate from the over-orbital to millennial scales, and that loess accumulation rates (LAR) and loess particle-size reflect many features of the northern high latitude ice conditions. Consequently, correlating the loess and marine records could offer the possibility for addressing the hemispheric climate links. Our loess-marine correlations show that both records are broadly coupled during the Pleistocene. However, numerous decoupled features exist between the two records. Marine oxygen isotope record shows a general trend of increased ice-volume during the Pleistocene. This trend has no clear reflection in the loess LAR and grain-size data. A prominent change at ~ 430 ka, referred to as the Mid-Brunhes Event (MBE), is clearly documented in both marine and EPICA ice records while its reflections in loess are rather ambiguous. Both marine and EPICA data show a cooler-than-average interglacial for the marine-oxygen isotope stage 13 (MIS-13) while a series of terrestrial records show a warm-extreme interglacial for the northern hemisphere. During a number of glacial intervals, such as MIS-16, MIS 14, MIS-12 and MIS-3, interglacial-level of loess grain-size are observed while they have no obvious reflections in the marine and EPICA ice records. Based on a multi-proxy approach, we argue that these decoupled features between the loess and marine records are attributable to the asymmetrical behaviors of the Pleistocene climates between the southern and northern hemispheres.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85930", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85933" } }
{"authors":"Dean Whitman::Florida International Univ--Rene Price::Florida International Univ--Tom Frankovich::Florida International Univ--James Fourqurean::Florida International Univ--", "title":"NS51B-06: Electromagnetic Surveying in the Mangrove Lakes Region of Everglades National Park", "abstract":"The Mangrove Lakes are an interconnected set of shallow (~ 1m), brackish lake and creek systems on the southern margin of the Everglades adjacent to Florida Bay. Current efforts associated with the Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan (CERP) aim to increase freshwater flow into this region. This study describes preliminary results of geophysical surveys in the lakes conducted to assess changes in the groundwater chemistry as part of a larger hydrologic and geochemical study in the Everglades Lakes region. Marine geophysical profiles were conducted in Alligator Creek (West Lake) and McCormick Creek systems in May, 2014. Data included marine electromagnetic (EM) profiles and soundings, water depth measurements, surface water conductivity and salinity measurements. A GSSI Profiler EMP-400 multi-frequency EM conductivity meter continuously recorded in-phase and quadrature field components at 1, 8, and 15 KHz. The system was deployed in a flat bottomed plastic kayak towed behind a motorized skiff. Lake water depths were continuously measured with a sounder/chart plotter which was calibrated with periodic sounding rod measurements. At periodic intervals during the survey, the profiling was stopped and surface water conductivity, temperature and salinity are recorded with a portable YSI probe on the tow boat. Over 40,000 discrete 3-frequency EM measurements were collected. The data were inverted to 2-layer models representing the water layer thickness and conductivity and the lake bottom conductivity. At spot locations, models were constrained with water depth soundings and surface water conductivity measurements. At other locations along the profiles, the water depth and conductivity were allowed to be free, but the free models were generally consistent with the constrained models. Multilayer sub-bottom models were also explored but were found to be poorly constrained. In West Lake, sub-bottom conductivities decreased from 400 mS/m in the west to 200 mS/m in the east indicating a general W to E decrease in groundwater salinity. In the McCormick Creek system, sub-bottom conductivities increased from 200 mS/m at the north end of Seven Palm Lake to over 650 mS/m at the southern end of Monroe Lake indicating a general N to S increase in ground water salinity. Additional profiles are planned in August, 2015.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85933", "section":"Near Surface Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85934" } }
{"authors":"Emerson Speyerer::Arizona State University--Mark Robinson::Arizona State University--Robert Wagner::--", "title":"P43F-01: Continuous Bombardment: Effect of Small Primary and Secondary Impacts on the Lunar Regolith", "abstract":"The Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter Camera (LROC) began systematically mapping the Moon in the summer of 2009 with the goal of acquiring an image dataset to facilitate future exploration [1]. With the benefit of the extended science missions, we have acquired and systematically examined over 14,000 before and after Narrow Angle Camera (NAC) observations, called NAC temporal pairs. From this growing dataset, we have discovered a dynamic Moon with over a hundred new resolved craters and over 26,000 smaller features we define as splotches. These splotches lack a distinguishable crater rim, but alter the observed reflectance of the surface by a few percent. Some of these splotches contain very small primary or secondary craters, but the diameter is too small (< 3 pixels) to be clearly identified and measured in NAC images. However, many of the splotches are directly linked to recent impact events and are thought to be secondary disturbances of the regolith. Robinson et al. (2014) identified nearly 250 splotches around an 18 m impact crater that formed on 17 March 2013 [2]. The shape of some of the splotches indicated a direction of emplacement, which pointed back to the primary crater. In addition, other large populations of splotches exist around other new impacts as well, which support the hypothesis that the emplacement of distal ejecta from nearby craters may form them. Using statistics gathered from these NAC temporal pairs and Monte Carlo simulations, we can estimate the timespan in which the entire lunar surface is affected by these small surface changes. This is important, in order to estimate the rate and understand the risk imposed by these small primary and secondary surface changes. References: [1] Robinson et al. (2010) Space Sci. Rev., 150, 1-4, 81-124. [2] Robinson et al. (2015) Icarus, 252, pp. 229–235.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85934", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85935" } }
{"authors":"Russell Landry::University of Texas at Dallas--", "title":"SM23B-2567: Empirical Model of Subauroral Polarization Streams (SAPS) During Geomagnetic Storms", "abstract":"Subauroral Polarization Streams (SAPS) are important electromagnetic phenomena associated with geomagnetic storms that affect the inner magnetosphere and ionosphere. They are characterized by strong sunward plasma flows caused by poleward-directed electric fields in the region of the ionosphere equatorword of the auroral zone. To examine the effects subauroral electric fields have on ITM coupling and magnetospheric-ionospheric convection we are developing an empirical model of SAPS using data acquired by the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) spacecraft which have made decades of in-situ measurements of ionospheric ion drifts, composition, and precipitating auroral particles. These measurements are used to characterize the subauroral electric fields relative to the location of the auroral boundary at varying magnetic local times and magnetic activity levels. As a critical component of this model, we have developed a model of the nightside zero energy electron precipitation boundary equatorward of the auroral oval parameterized by AE and MLT, using boundary identifications derived from DMSP data. We will use this model to create a global subauroral potential model and perform a superposed epoch study of SAPS fields in relationship to the auroral boundary during selected geomagnetic storms as a function of storm phase. A global empirical model of SAPS electric fields of this kind is required to realistically model thermosphere-ionosphere coupling and inner-magnetospheric convection.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85935", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85936" } }
{"authors":"Chaoqun Lu::Iowa Sate University Auburn University--Hanqin Tian::Auburn University--Jia Yang::Auburn University--Bowen Zhang::Auburn University--Rongting Xu::Auburn University--", "title":"B14A-06: Historical Pattern and Future Trajectories of Terrestrial N2O Emission driven by Multi-factor Global Changes", "abstract":"Nitrous oxide (N2O) is among the most important greenhouse gases only next to carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4) due to its long life time and high radiative forcing (with a global warming potential 265 times as much as CO2 at 100-year time horizon). The Atmospheric concentration of N2O has increased by 20% since pre-industrial era, and this increase plays a significant role in shaping anthropogenic climate change. However, compared to CO2- and CH4-related research, fewer studies have been performed in assessing and predicting the spatiotemporal patterns of N2O emission from natural and agricultural soils. Here we used a coupled biogeochemical model, DLEM, to quantify the historical and future changes in global terrestrial N2O emissions resulting from natural and anthropogenic perturbations including climate variability, atmospheric CO2 concentration, nitrogen deposition, land use and land cover changes, and agricultural land management practices (i.e., synthetic nitrogen fertilizer use, manure application, and irrigation etc.) over the period 1900-2099. We focused on inter-annual variation and long-term trend of terrestrial N2O emission driven by individual and combined environmental changes during historical and future periods. The sensitivity of N2O emission to climate, atmospheric composition, and human activities has been examined at biome-, latitudinal, continental and global scales. Future projections were conducted to identify the hot spots and hot time periods of global N2O emission under two emission scenarios (RCP2.6 and RCP8.5). It provides a modeling perspective for understanding human-induced N2O emission growth and developing potential management strategies to mitigate further atmospheric N2O increase and climate warming.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85936", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85938" } }
{"authors":"Darren Drewry::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Christian Frankenberg::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Manish Verma::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Joe Berry::Carnegie Institution for Science--David Schimel::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Sven Geier::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Mark Schwochert::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"B54D-04: The Chlorophyll Fluorescence Imaging Spectrometer (CFIS): A New Airborne Instrument for Quantifying Solar-Induced Fluorescence", "abstract":"Recent demonstrations of the retrieval of vegetation solar-induced fluorescence (SIF) emission from satellite platforms have opened up the possibility of remotely monitoring photosynthetic function, in addition to the structural and biochemical parameters that characterize the current capabilities of vegetation observing systems. These satellite retrievals, from platforms such as GOSAT, GOME-2, and most recently NASA’s Orbiting Carbon Observatory 2 (OCO-2), provide powerful evidence of the correlation between vegetation productivity and SIF at seasonal to annual timescales, and at spatial resolutions of tens to hundreds of kilometers. The Chlorophyll Fluorescence Imaging Spectrometer (CFIS) was recently developed for OCO-2 validation purposes and provides an airborne capability to help fill the spatial gap between leaf- or canopy-level observations of SIF flux and extensive satellite footprints. The flexibility of an airborne instrument likewise allows for studies of the temporal variability of SIF emission over consecutive days, or with meteorological variability throughout a day. CFIS is a high resolution (<0.1nm) spectrometer covering the 740-770nm wavelength range, optimized for SIF quantification. Here we present an overview of the instrument design and capabilities, along with the retrieval methodology. An evaluation of data collected during initial campaigns conducted during the spring and summer of 2015 are also presented, demonstrating variability within and between days for campaigns spanning multiple days in the Midwest US and Northern California. Results will be compared to OCO-2 data as well as flux-tower measurements made during the CFIS flights.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85938", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85939" } }
{"authors":"Kaoru Tachiiri::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--Masato Shinoda::Nagoya University--Yuki Morinaga::--", "title":"GC13E-1208: Development of a livestock population model for winter disaster risk assessment in Mongolia", "abstract":"Mongolia has historically experienced winter disasters, called dzuds in Mongolian, and posed serious damages in the livestock sector. For example, a series of dzuds in 2000-2002 killed more than 11 million livestock, and that in 2010 killed over 10 million livestock. For effective risk assessment of this disaster, we are now developing a livestock population model. In this model, livestock die when their weights are very low, and the weights are calculated by energy balance. The energy intake is calculated as a product of potential and relative intake. Potential intake is determined by weight, and relative intake is a function of biomass amount in surrounding grassland. In winter, accessibility to grass (function of snow depth, air temperature, and wind speed) is also considered. On the other hand, energy consumption is the sum of those by thermoregulation and grazing activity. Energy loss by thermoregulation is a function of weight and climatic conditions (at present air temperature and wind speed). Energy loss by grazing activity is calculated from biomass density and condition. We plan to validate and calibrate this model by using data in Mongolian grassland, and then to use for dzud risk assessment of that country.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85939", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85941" } }
{"authors":"Xiaochi Zhou::Duke University--John Albertson::University of Modena and Reggio Emilia--Adam Gaylord::Colorado State University--Joseph von Fischer::Colorado State University--Joe Rudek::Environmental Defense Fund New York--Eben Thoma::US Environmental Protection Agency--", "title":"A43F-0361: Mobile monitoring of fugitive methane emissions from natural gas consumer industries", "abstract":"Natural gas is used as a feedstock for major industrial processes, such as ammonia and fertilizer production. However, fugitive methane emissions from many major end-use sectors of the natural gas supply chain have not been quantified yet. This presentation introduces new tools for estimating emission rates from mobile methane measurements, and examines results from recent field measurements conducted downwind of several industrial plants using a specialized vehicle equipped with fast response methane sensor. Using these data along with local meteorological data measured by a 3-D sonic anemometer, a Bayesian approach is applied to probabilistically infer methane emission rates based on a modified Gaussian dispersion model. Source rates are updated recursively with repeated traversals of the downwind methane plume when the vehicle was circling around the targeted facilities. Data from controlled tracer release experiments are presented and used to validate the approach. With access via public roads, this mobile monitoring method is able to quickly assess the emission strength of facilities along the sensor path. This work is developing the capacity for efficient regional coverage of potential methane emission rates in support of leak detection and mitigation efforts.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85941", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85942" } }
{"authors":"Christopher Zappa::Lamont -Doherty Earth Observatory--", "title":"NH41E-07: Marginal Ice Zone Processes Observed from Unmanned Aerial Systems", "abstract":"Recent years have seen extreme changes in the Arctic. Marginal ice zones (MIZ), or areas where the ` ice-albedo feedback`  driven by solar warming is highest and ice melt is extensive, may provide insights into the extent of these changes. Furthermore, MIZ play a central role in setting the air-sea CO2 balance making them a critical component of the global carbon cycle. Incomplete understanding of how the sea-ice modulates gas fluxes renders it difficult to estimate the carbon budget in MIZ. Here, we investigate the turbulent mechanisms driving mixing and gas exchange in leads, polynyas and in the presence of ice floes using both field and laboratory measurements. Measurements from unmanned aerial systems (UAS) in the marginal ice zone were made during 2 experiments: 1) North of Oliktok Point AK in the Beaufort Sea were made during the Marginal Ice Zone Ocean and Ice Observations and Processes EXperiment (MIZOPEX) in July-August 2013 and 2) Fram Strait and Greenland Sea northwest of Ny-Ålesund, Svalbard, Norway during the Air-Sea-Ice Physics and Biogeochemistry Experiment (ASIPBEX) April – May 2015. We developed a number of new payloads that include: i) hyperspectral imaging spectrometers to measure VNIR (400-1000 nm) and NIR (900-1700 nm) spectral radiance; ii) net longwave and net shortwave radiation for ice-ocean albedo studies; iii) air-sea-ice turbulent fluxes as well as wave height, ice freeboard, and surface roughness with a LIDAR; and iv) drone-deployed micro-drifters (DDµD) deployed from the UAS that telemeter temperature, pressure, and RH as it descends through the atmosphere and temperature and salinity of the upper meter of the ocean once it lands on the ocean’s surface. Visible and IR imagery of melting ice floes clearly defines the scale of the ice floes. The IR imagery show distinct cooling of the skin sea surface temperature (SST) as well as an intricate circulation and mixing pattern that depends on the surface current, wind speed, and near-surface vertical temperature/salinity structure. Individual ice floes develop turbulent wakes as they drift and cause transient mixing of an influx of colder surface (fresh) melt water. We capture a melting and mixing event that explains the changing pattern observed in skin SST and is substantiated using laboratory experiments.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85942", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85943" } }
{"authors":"Amanda Demopoulos::U.S.G.S.--Jill Bourque::U.S.G.S.--Sandra Brooke::Florida State University--", "title":"OS33A-2009: Benthic Community Structure and Sediment Geochemical Properties at Hydrocarbon Seeps Along the Continental Slope of the Western North Atlantic", "abstract":"Hydrocarbon seeps support distinct benthic communities capable of utilizing reduced chemical compounds for nutrition. In recent years, methane seepage has been increasingly documented along the continental slope of the U.S. Atlantic margin. In 2012 and 2013, two seeps were investigated in this region: a shallow site near Baltimore Canyon (410-450 m) and a deep site near Norfolk Canyon (1600 m). Both sites contain extensive mussel beds and microbial mats. Sediment cores and grab samples were collected to quantify the abundance, diversity, and community structure of benthic macrofauna (>300 mm) in relationship to the associated sediment environment (organic carbon and nitrogen, stable isotopes 13C and 15N, grain size, and depth) of mussel beds, mats, and slope habitats. Macrofaunal densities in microbial mats were four times greater than those present in mussel beds and slope sediments. Macrofaunal communities were distinctly different both between depths and among habitat types. Specifically, microbial mat sediments were dominated by the annelid families Dorvilleidae, Capitellidae, and Tubificidae, while mussel habitats had higher proportions of crustaceans. Diversity was lower in Baltimore microbial mat habitats, but higher in mussel and slope sediments compared to Norfolk seep habitats found at deeper depths. Multivariate statistical analysis identified sediment carbon:nitrogen (C:N) ratios and 13C values as important variables for structuring the macrofaunal communities. Higher C:N ratios were present within microbial mat habitats and depleted 13C values occurred in sediments adjacent to mussel beds found in Norfolk Canyon seeps. Differences in the quality and source of organic matter present in the seep habitats are known to be important drivers in macrofaunal community structure and associated food webs. The multivariate analysis provides new insight into the relative importance of the seep sediment quality in supporting dense macrofaunal communities compared to other seeps found throughout the region.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85943", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85944" } }
{"authors":"James Fulton::Baylor University--Ben Van Mooy::Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution--", "title":"PP13A-2262: Scytonemin and Photosynthetic Pigment Proxies for Late Pleistocene/Holocene Environmental Change in the Eastern Great Basin", "abstract":"Sedimentary pigments are biomarkers of photosynthetic organisms, most commonly derived from aquatic bacteria and algae but also with potential terrigenous sources. We detected a diverse pigment assemblage with variable down-core distributions in Great Salt Lake (GSL) sediments deposited since ca. 280 ka (GLAD1-GSL00, core 4). The most abundant pigments included derivatives of chlorophyll a, most likely from algae or cyanobacteria, bacteriochlorophyll c from green sulfur bacteria, okenone from purple sulfur bacteria, and scytonemin from UV-exposed cyanobacteria. Scytonemin is a biomarker for colonial cyanobacteria exposed to UV-radiation. In GSL it has potential sources from bioherms on the shoreline or microbiotic soil crusts from the adjacent Great Basin Desert. Scytonemin concentration was highest in the Upper Salt and Sapropel (USS) unit, deposited between 11.5-10 ka in shallow water (ca. 10 m), following deep pluvial Lake Bonneville (30-18 cal ka), the Provo lake level (ca. 18-15 cal ka), and the Gilbert transgression (11.6 cal ka). Scytonemin concentration was very low in sediments deposited during the deep lake phases, even though bioherms were prominent shoreline features. The USS was deposited under hypersaline waters and contained remarkably low concentrations of photosynthetic pigment derivatives that would be expected in organic-matter-rich sediments deposited under productive surface waters or anoxic bottom waters. Stable carbon and nitrogen isotopic data point toward a desert soil crust source for scytonemin in the USS, similar to what we previously observed in the Holocene Black Sea sapropel. We propose that increased aridity supported the widespread occurrence and erosion of microbiotic soil crusts during deposition of the USS. This is consistent with interpretations of Great Salt Lake hydrology, pointing toward a broader regional aridity event. Holocene sediments above the USS also contain scytonemin at relatively high concentration, consistent with persistent arid/semi-arid conditions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85944", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85945" } }
{"authors":"Stephanie Bohlman::University of Florida--Sarah Graves::University of Florida--Morteza Shahriari Nia::University of Florida--Gader Paul::University of Florida--Kalantari Leila::University of Florida--Daisy Zhe Wang::University of Florida--", "title":"B53I-07: Understanding species composition from NEON high resolution hyperspectral-LIDAR data across a heterogeneous landscape: Effects of land use, fire regime and topography", "abstract":"The 2014 NEON hyperspectral LIDAR data allows landscape scale analysis of how abiotic factors and management history affect ecosystem composition and function. At the Ordway Swisher Biological Station (OSBS) in Florida, the core terrestrial NEON site in the Southeast U.S., we are developing a framework applicable to all NEON sites for mapping and analyzing species composition. In this region, small changes in topography (elevation varies by only 20 m at OSBS) along with fire history are the dominant controls on tree species composition. To discriminate species, we use compare support vector machines (SVMs) with possibilistic classifiers (POCs), which may classify species as unknown and represent ambiguity among spectrally similar species better than common classifiers than (SVM). Species classification was most accurate (90%) using POC in the dominant upland longleaf pine forest type (where most trees belonged to just two species: Pinus palustris and Quercus laevis). It was lower (<60%) using SVM and in the hardwood hammocks (where > 10 hardwood species commonly co-occur, including multiple Quercus). For co-occurring hardwood species that were difficult to separate spectrally, we combined the NEON hyperspectral data with additional data sets (global and regional plant trait databases, state-level maps of ecosystem type, and U.S. Forest Service inventory data) in a possibilistic framework to increase the separability of species identity. We then generate a landscape-scale map of species composition at OSBS. Combining this species map with a LIDAR-derived topography, we show that species associations vary with topography. For example, some Quercus species tend to co-occur with each other in uplands, but not in mesic hammocks. We examine potential factors causing changes in community composition, including topography, water table depth, soil type, current fire management regime, and historical land use. By combining the NEON hyperspectral and LIDAR data with detailed records prescribed fire, we also examine how fire regime (frequency and year since last burn) affect fuel quantity and leaf chemistry.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85945", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85946" } }
{"authors":"Rachel Freed::Organization Not Listed--", "title":"ED51E-04: An Online Student Research Institute Designed to Engage Students in Original Scientific Research Using State of the Art Technologies to Increase Participation in STEM Fields", "abstract":"Affordable and accessible technology has advanced tremendously in the last decade allowing educational paradigms to change dramatically to more student-centered, experiential and project-based models. Additionally, as the need to increase the number of students entering STEM fields in the United States becomes more critical it is imperative to understand the factors that determine student career pathways and to provide opportunities for students to experience, understand and pursue scientific endeavors. The Institute for Student Astronomical Research was founded in order to provide a means for high school and early undergraduate students to engage in meaningful and relevant scientific research. A major goal is to give students the experience of true-to-life scientific investigation from the planning and proposal stages to the data collection and analysis, writing up and presenting of scientific findings and finally to the publication of results. Furthermore, the Institute is designed to collect data on how involvement in the Science Research Seminars influences educational and career choices for students in longitudinal studies following participants for several years. In the first year of the online course of the Institute 10 student teams conducted original research and published their findings in peer-reviewed journals. Lessons learned from the pilot year are being applied to the Institute as efforts to scale up the program are underway.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85946", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85947" } }
{"authors":"Nicole Khan::Rutgers University--Erica Ashe::Rutgers University New Brunswick--Ben Horton::Rutgers University New Brunswick--Gilles Brocard::University of Pennsylvania--Andrea Dutton::University of Florida--Simon Engelhart::University of Rhode Island--Robert Kopp::Rutgers University New Brunswick--David Hill::Oregon State University--W Peltier::University of Toronto--Frederick Scatena::University of Pennsylvania--", "title":"PP43C-2295: Timing and magnitude of the Caribbean mid-Holocene highstand", "abstract":"We present a database of published and new relative sea-level (RSL) data for the past 13 ka, which constrains the Holocene sea-level histories of the Caribbean coast of Central and South America (Florida Keys, USA to Guyana) and the Bahamas and Greater and Lesser Antilles islands. Our evaluation of mangrove peat and Acropora palmata sea-level indicators from geological investigations provides 503 sea-level index points and 242 limiting dates. We subdivide the database into 21 regions based on the availability of data, tectonic setting, and distance from the former Laurentide ice sheet. Most index points (75%) and limiting dates (90%) are <8 ka, although there is an unusual temporal distribution with the greatest amount of the data (~28%) occurring between 6-8 ka. We reassess and screen radiocarbon and U/Th ages of mangrove peat and coral data. We use the stratigraphic position (overburden thickness) of index points account for sediment compaction, and use the paleotidal model of Hill et al. (2011) to account for Holocene changes in paleotidal range. A noisy-input Gaussian process regression model calculates that the rates of RSL change were highest during the early Holocene (3-8 mm/yr) and have decreased over time (< 2 mm/yr), which is related to the reduction of ice equivalent meltwater input and collapse of the proglacial forebulge during the Holocene. The sea-level reconstructions demonstrate that RSL did not exceed the present height (0 m) during the Holocene in the majority of locations, with the exception of a small highstand (<2 m) on the northern coast of South America along the Orinoco Delta and Suriname/Guyana located furthest away from the former Laurentide Ice Sheet. The different sea-level histories are an ongoing isostatic response to deglaciation of the Laurentide Ice Sheet and suggest subsidence resulting from collapse of the proglacial forebulge reaches further south than previously considered.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85947", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85948" } }
{"authors":"Erik Hobbie::University of New Hampshire--", "title":"B41C-0459: Long-term Carbon and Nitrogen Dynamics at SPRUCE Revealed through Stable Isotopes in Peat Profiles", "abstract":"Carbon and nitrogen turnover in peatlands is of considerable interest because peat is a large reservoir of stored carbon that could emit greenhouse gases in response to climate change. Because peat cores preserve a long-term record of system carbon and nitrogen dynamics, it is possible to use stable isotopes as markers of changes in carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) dynamics over time. Here, we used δ15N and δ13C patterns throughout the depth profile of peat cores to understand controls over C-N cycling in the Marcell S1 forested bog in northern Minnesota. In multiple regression analyses, δ15N and δ13C correlated strongly with depth, plot location, %C, %N, and each other. Negative correlation of δ15N with %N presumably reflected removal of 15N-depleted N via denitrification, diffusion, or plant N transfer via mycorrhizal fungi. A step increase in the depth coefficient for δ15N of ~3‰ from -25 cm to -35 cm suggested that the N removal process primarily operates at a discrete depth corresponding to the juncture between aerobic and anaerobic layers defined by the water table. Higher δ15N and lower δ13C in plots closer to uplands may reflect distinct hydrology and accompanying shifts in C and N dynamics in the lagg area fringing the bog. The Suess effect (declining δ13CO2 since the Industrial Revoluation) and aerobic decomposition lowered δ13C in recent surficial samples. Small increases in δ13C at -112 cm (4300 calibrated years BP) and -85 cm (3800 calibrated years BP) may reflect C dynamics during a suspected transitional fen stage (based on paleoecology at a nearby bog), when reduced methanotrophy retained less 13C-depleted carbon derived from methane than in later periods. The C/N decreased until about -85 cm and thereafter remained steady, suggesting that the active zone of aerobic processing during drought may extend to this depth. The inflection point in calculated carbon accumulation rates at this depth supports this conclusion.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85948", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85949" } }
{"authors":"Shulei Zhang::Tsinghua University--Dawen Yang::Tsinghua University--", "title":"H11C-1365: Quantifying the effect of vegetation change on regional water balance within the Budyko Framework", "abstract":"Budyko framework is widely used to investigate impacts of climate and landscape changes on regional hydrology, but quantifying the effect of vegetation change is still a challenge due to the lack of an explicit expression of vegetation change in Budyko equations. This study attempts to establish a relationship between the change of landscape parameter in a Budyko equation and the change of vegetation (represented by NDVI) in Yellow River Basin and Hai River Basin of China, where vegetation and regional hydrology changed significantly during the past 30 years. It is found that the ratio of landscape parameter change to NDVI change has a good relationship with the aridity index, and thus vegetation change can be converted into landscape parameter change. Then the NDVI elasticity of runoff is introduced and formulized under the Budyko framework. It provides a useful tool for quantitative evaluation of regional hydrological response to vegetation change.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85949", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85950" } }
{"authors":"Musa Maharramov::Stanford University--Mark Zoback::Stanford University--", "title":"NS42A-05: Characterization of Reservoir Heterogeneity from Surface Deformation", "abstract":"In our earlier work we resolved complex evolution of pressure fronts in a heavy oil reservoir undergoing cyclic steam stimulation. Our method was based on solving a regularized inverse problem for inverting the pore pressure change from surface displacements. In this work we extend our method to recover sharp contrasts in induced reservoir pressure that may be due to permeability barriers or hydraulically conductive faults. We demonstrate our method by inverting the pressure change from uplift observations for a synthetic model of a heterogeneous reservoir undergoing fluid injection. Using the theory of constrained optimization, we invert values and locations of sharp pressure contrasts from noisy measurements of surface deformation, and estimate the location of an impermeable boundary between reservoir compartments. In our synthetic model, two highly permeable reservoir compartments separated by a nearly impermeable barrier (first panel) undergo fluid injec- tion. We simulate pressure evolution within the reservoir (second panel) and model surface deformation induced by the subsurface pressure change (third panel), adding measurement noise to the result. We invert the noisy sur- face uplift measurements by solving a constrained optimization problem with Tikhonov regularization (fourth panel). The result achieves a good inversion quality in areas of finite pressure change but provides only a rough estimate for the barrier location. However, applying our new inversion technique with a total-variation regularization that favors sharp model contrasts while penalizing oscillations, we achieve a more accurate approximation of the permeability barrier as a level set of the inverted pressure field (fifth panel). Our new method provides a potentially useful tool for locating sharp subsurface pressure contrasts from surface uplift observations. The method can be used in a variety of applications for identifying subsurface permeabil- ity heterogeneities (such as seals and hydraulically conductive faults) from InSAR, tilt or GPS measurements of the induced surface deformation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85950", "section":"Near Surface Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85951" } }
{"authors":"Warren Finch::University of Queensland--Joshua Larsen::University of Queensland--Neil McIntyre::University of Queensland--", "title":"H43D-1535: Challenges in Estimating Groundwater Recharge in Semi-arid and Semi-confined Alluvial Systems", "abstract":"Uncertainty surrounding rates of groundwater recharge limits overall confidence in groundwater allocations and can lead to over-conservative assumptions in groundwater impact assessments. This problem is even more acute where more complex unsaturated flow paths are considered, such as within semi-confined alluvial systems. Researchers at The University of Queensland have developed an experimental study within the Condamine Alluvium, a significant aquifer in semi-arid eastern Australia, is used to determine groundwater recharge mechanisms for three distinct soil types (two vertosols and one chromosol) on both irrigated and non-irrigated areas. This variety of soil types, including shrink-swell clays, overly a higher permeability sand and gravel unsaturated zone and aquifer. The analysis uses 15-minute soil moisture data from Sentek EnviroSCAN Probe devices installed at 16 sites, with eight sensors in each site at depths from 100 to 4000mm. The vertosols exhibited signs of dynamic preferential flow paths due to the shrink swell properties of the soil. Precipitation rate and initial soil moisture content affect the infiltration response times for the three soils, with the chromosols requiring multiple precipitation events before experiencing any significant soil moisture storage changes in the lower depths (2000 – 4000mm). Storage changes below the root zone to a depth of 4m indicate large rates of potential recharge, up to 1300mm for the two years of data obtained. However, minimal rise has been observed in the water table (~12 m depth), potentially due to the highly transmissive sand and gravel aquifer. The analysis has shown that only very high temporal resolution monitoring of soil storage changes can effectively capture the dynamic preferential flow water flux. Lower temporal resolution monitoring, at the daily scale or greater, will bias the storage change estimates towards the matrix flow component and risk significant underestimation of the total unsaturated zone water flux providing potential recharge to aquifers.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85951", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85952" } }
{"authors":"Matthew Macander::ABR Inc.--Gerald Frost::ABR Inc.--", "title":"B51G-0517: Advanced Ecosystem Mapping Techniques for Large Arctic Study Domains Using Calibrated High-Resolution Imagery", "abstract":"Regional-scale mapping of vegetation and other ecosystem properties has traditionally relied on medium-resolution remote sensing such as Landsat (30 m) and MODIS (250 m). Yet, the burgeoning availability of high-resolution (<=2 m) imagery and ongoing advances in computing power and analysis tools raises the prospect of performing ecosystem mapping at fine spatial scales over large study domains. Here we demonstrate cutting-edge mapping approaches over a ~35,000 km² study area on Alaska’s North Slope using calibrated and atmospherically-corrected mosaics of high-resolution WorldView-2 and GeoEye-1 imagery: (1) an a priori spectral approach incorporating the Satellite Imagery Automatic Mapper (SIAM) algorithms; (2) image segmentation techniques; and (3) texture metrics. The SIAM spectral approach classifies radiometrically-calibrated imagery to general vegetation density categories and non-vegetated classes. The SIAM classes were developed globally and their applicability in arctic tundra environments has not been previously evaluated. Image segmentation, or object-based image analysis, automatically partitions high-resolution imagery into homogeneous image regions that can then be analyzed based on spectral, textural, and contextual information. We applied eCognition software to delineate waterbodies and vegetation classes, in combination with other techniques. Texture metrics were evaluated to determine the feasibility of using high-resolution imagery to algorithmically characterize periglacial surface forms (e.g., ice-wedge polygons), which are an important physical characteristic of permafrost-dominated regions but which cannot be distinguished by medium-resolution remote sensing. These advanced mapping techniques provide products which can provide essential information supporting a broad range of ecosystem science and land-use planning applications in northern Alaska and elsewhere in the circumpolar Arctic.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85952", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85953" } }
{"authors":"MD Jakir Hossen::Australian National University--Phil Cummins::Australian National University--Jan Dettmer::Australian National University--Toshitaka Baba::University of Tokushima--", "title":"S54A-07: An Efficient Method for Far-field Tsunami Forecasting", "abstract":"We have developed a hybrid method to forecast far-field tsunamis by combining traditional, least-squares inversion for initial sea surface displacement (LSQ) and time reverse imaging (TRI). This method has the same source representation as LSQ, which involves dividing the source region into a grid of “point” sources. For each of these, a tsunami Green’s function (GF) is computed using a basis function for sea surface displacement whose support is concentrated near the grid point. Instead of solving the linear inverse problem for initial sea surface displacement using regularized least-squares, we apply the TRI method to estimate initial sea surface displacement at each source grid point by convolving GFs with time-reversed observed waveforms recorded near the source region. This tsunami-source estimate is then used to forecast tsunami waveforms at greater distance. We apply this method to the 2011 Tohoku, Japan tsunami because of the availability of an extensive set of high-quality tsunami waveform recordings. The results show that the method can predict tsunami waveforms having good agreement with observed waveforms at near-field stations not part of the source estimation, and excellent agreement with far-field waveforms. The spatial distribution of cumulative sea surface displacement agrees well with other models obtained in more sophisticated inversions, but the temporal resolution of this method does not resolve source kinematics. The method has potential for application in tsunami warning systems, as it is computationally efficient and can be applied to estimate the initial source model by applying precomputed Green's functions in order to provide more accurate and realistic tsunami predictions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85953", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85955" } }
{"authors":"Melvin Kunkel::Idaho Power Company--Derek Blestrud::Idaho Power Company--Shaun Parkinson::Idaho Power Company--Vincent Holbrook::Idaho Power Company--Shawn Benner::Boise State University--James Fisher::Boise State University--", "title":"A41G-0144: Payette River Basin Project: Improving Operational Forecasting in Complex Terrain through Chemistry", "abstract":"Idaho Power Company (IPC) is an investor owned hydroelectric based utility, serving customers throughout southern Idaho and eastern Oregon. The University of Arizona (UA) runs an operational 1.8-km resolution Weather and Research Forecast (WRF) model for IPC, which is incorporated into IPC near and real-time forecasts for hydro, solar and wind generation, load servicing and a large-scale wintertime cloud seeding operation to increase winter snowpack. Winter snowpack is critical to IPC, as hydropower provides ~50% of the company’s generation needs. In efforts to improve IPC’s near-term forecasts and operational guidance to its cloud seeding program, IPC is working extensively with UA and the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) to improve WRF performance in the complex terrain of central Idaho. As part of this project, NCAR has developed a WRF based cloud seeding module (WRF CS) to deliver high-resolution, tailored forecasts to provide accurate guidance for IPC’s operations. Working with Boise State University (BSU), IPC is conducting a multiyear campaign to validate the WRF CS’s ability to account for and disperse the cloud seeding agent (AgI) within the boundary layer. This improved understanding of how WRF handles the AgI dispersion and fate will improve the understanding and ultimately the performance of WRF to forecast other parameters. As part of this campaign, IPC has developed an extensive ground based monitoring network including a Remote Area Snow Sampling Device (RASSD) that provides spatially and temporally discrete snow samples during active cloud seeding periods. To quantify AgI dispersion in the complex terrain, BSU conducts trace element analysis using LA-ICP-MS on the RASSD sampled snow to provide measurements (at the 10-12 level) of incorporated AgI, measurements are compare directly with WRF CS’s estimates of distributed AgI. Modeling and analysis results from previous year’s research and plans for coming seasons will be presented.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85955", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85956" } }
{"authors":"Timothy Fry::Colorado School of Mines--Reed Maxwell::Colorado School of Mines--John McCray::Colorado School of Mines--Christopher Higgins::Colorado School of Mines--", "title":"H21J-1544: Evaluation of Distributed BMPs in an Urban Watershed – High Resolution Modeling for Stormwater Management", "abstract":"Urbanization presents challenging water resource problems for communities worldwide. The hydromodifications associated with urbanization results in increased runoff rates and volumes and increased peak flows which can lead to increased erosion and stream destabilization, decreased evapotranspiration, decreased ground water recharge, increases in pollutant loading, and localized anthropogenic climate change or Urban Heat Islands. Stormwater management is shifting from a drainage-efficiency focus to a natural systems focus. The natural system focus, referred to as Low Impact Development (LID), or Green Infrastructure, uses best management practices (BMPs) to reduce the impacts caused by urbanization hydromodification. Currently there are two modeling approaches used to evaluate BMPs in urban watersheds, conceptually-based coarse resolution hydrologic models and high-resolution physically-based models. Conceptual urban hydrology-hydraulic models typically are used to determine peak flow hydrographs within a watershed based on uniform rainfall, the basins size, shape, and percent of impervious land cover. Physically-based hydrologic models simulate integrated surface and subsurface water flow. Here, we use high-resolution physically based hydrologic models of the urban hydrologic cycle with explicit inclusion of the built environment. We compare the inclusion and exclusion of LID features to evaluate the parameterizations used to model these components in more conceptually based models. Differences in response are discussed and a road map is put forth for improving LID representation in commonly used urban water models.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85956", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85957" } }
{"authors":"Tiffany Liu::Organization Not Listed--Kerri Johnson::University of California Santa Cruz--", "title":"EP53A-0943: A New Method for Measuring River Sinuosity across Varying Length Scales", "abstract":"Sinuosity is an emergent characteristic of meandering rivers. In bedrock rivers, climate (Stark 2009) and bedrock lithology (Johnson and Finnegan 2015) likely influence sinuosity. Comparing trends in sinuosity between and along rivers with different climates, lithology, and tectonics has the potential to shed light on what controls sinuosity. However, measuring sinuosity in a meaningful way is challenging. The length scale over which sinuosity is calculated affects the measurement. For example, a river with many tight curves generates greater sinuosities with a shorter length scale, and a river with a curved valley might generate greater sinuosities with a longer length scale. Therefore, to find the distribution of sinuosity across length scales, a method is needed that can compare sinuosities at a variety of length scales. To achieve this goal, we made a tool that calculates sinuosities across many length scales along a river and derives both the maximum sinuosity and the length scale at which these maximums occur for each point on the river. Using digital elevation models (DEMs) of a number of landscapes with varying climate, lithology and uplift rate, we extracted river networks using a flow accumulation method. From this, our code works within the ArcGIS Python window. It applies a moving window to calculate sinuosity at each point along the river for a wide range of length scales. All the points’ maximum sinuosities can be displayed, even if they are derived from different length scales. Because the code is run within ArcGIS, it is easy to display these sinuosity data as attributes of the original river networks. This tool opens new possibilities for tracking patterns in sinuosity along and between rivers. Our preliminary data suggests that this method will be useful for interpreting trends in sinuosity and learning about what factors influence them.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85957", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85958" } }
{"authors":"Megan Krusor::University of California Davis--Sharon Grim::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Dylan Wilmeth::University of Southern California--Hope Johnson::California State University Fullerton--William Berelson::University of Southern California--Bradley Stevenson::University of Oklahoma Norman Campus--Blake Stamps::University of Oklahoma Norman Campus--Frank Corsetti::University of Southern California--John Spear::Colorado School of Mines--", "title":"B21C-0450: Manganese Influences Carbonate Precipitation in a Laminated Microbial Mat", "abstract":"Investigating mineralization within modern microbial mats informs our interpretation of ancient microbialites and the mineralization process. Microbial mats in Little Hot Creek (LHC), California contain 4 distinct layers with different microbiota. Each layer of the mat is supersaturated with regard to calcium carbonate (CaCO3), which increases with depth. Total organic carbon decreases with depth through the mat. We used 13C-labeled bicarbonate incubations of each mat layer to calculate growth rates of organic carbon and CaCO3 within the mat. Incubations were also amended with Mn or Mg to test their effect on rates of CaCO3 and organic carbon formation. The Mn-amended top layer increased CaCO3 precipitation and organic carbon growth. Mn increased organic carbon production in the lowest layer to a lesser extent, but not growth of CaCO3. Mn addition had no effect on growth rates in the two intervening layers. Mg amendment stimulated only organic carbon formation in the top layer, with little to no effect on the lower layers or overall CaCO3 formation. We attribute the elevated CaCO3 precipitation noted after Mn addition to increased oxygenic photosynthetic activity. Oxygenic photosynthesis requires Mn as an enzyme cofactor and promotes carbonate precipitation. We propose that the phototrophic community was responsible for most of the CaCO3 precipitation in the upper layer. Phototrophs gradually moved upwards for optimal access to sunlight, and as the mat grew, “tenant” microorganisms inhabited the lower carbonate layers while the “builders” remained on top. The relatively constant percentages of inorganic carbon below the top layer combined with observed minimal CaCO3 precipitation under laboratory conditions suggest that additional research into potential metabolisms that impact carbonate formation would be informative. These results improve our understanding of the linkages between microbial metabolisms, carbonate precipitation in microbial mats, and the potential of microbial mats to mineralize.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85958", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85959" } }
{"authors":"Ilkay Altintas::University of California San Diego--Jeff Sale::University of California San Diego--Jessica Block::University of California San Diego--Charles Cowart::University of California San Diego--Daniel Crawl::San Diego Supercomputer Center--", "title":"IN33D-1821: Creation a Geo Big Data Outreach and Training Collaboratory for Wildfire Community", "abstract":"A major challenge for the geoscience community is the training and education of current and next generation big data geoscientists. In wildfire research, there are an increasing number of tools, middleware and techniques to use for data science related to wildfires. The necessary computing infrastructures are often within reach and most of the software tools for big data are freely available. But what has been lacking is a transparent platform and training program to produce data science experts who can use these integrated tools effectively. Scientists well versed to take advantage of big data technologies in geoscience applications is of critical importance to the future of research and knowledge advancement. To address this critical need, we are developing learning modules to teach process-based thinking to capture the value of end-to-end systems of reusable blocks of knowledge and integrate the tools and technologies used in big data analysis in an intuitive manner. WIFIRE is an end-to-end cyberinfrastructure for dynamic data-driven simulation, prediction and visualization of wildfire behavior. To this end, we are openly extending an environment we have built for “big data training” (biobigdata.ucsd.edu) to similar MOOC-based approaches to the wildfire community. We are building an environment that includes training modules for distributed platforms and systems, Big Data concepts, and scalable workflow tools, along with other basics of data science including data management, reproducibility and sharing of results. We also plan to provide teaching modules with analytical and dynamic data-driven wildfire behavior modeling case studies which address the needs not only of standards-based K-12 science education but also the needs of a well-educated and informed citizenry. Another part our outreach mission is to educate our community on all aspects of wildfire research. One of the most successful ways of accomplishing this is through high school and undergraduate student internships. Students have worked closely with WIFIRE researchers on various projects including the development of statistical models of wildfire ignition probabilities for southern California, and the development of a smartphone app for crowd-sourced wildfire reporting through social networks such as Twitter and Facebook.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85959", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85960" } }
{"authors":"Carlos Ortiz::University of Pennsylvania--Douglas Jerolmack::University of Pennsylvania--", "title":"NG12A-08: Phase Transitions in Geomorphology", "abstract":"Landscapes are patterns in a dynamic steady-state, due to competing processes that smooth or sharpen features over large distances and times. Geomorphic transport laws have been developed to model the mass-flux due to different processes, but are unreasonably effective at recovering the scaling relations of landscape features. Using a continuum approximation to compare experimental landscapes and the observed landscapes of the earth, one finds they share similar morphodynamics despite a breakdown of classical dynamical similarity between the two. We propose the origin of this effectiveness is a different kind of dynamic similarity in the statistics of initiation and cessation of motion of groups of grains, which is common to disordered systems of grains under external driving. We will show how the existing data of sediment transport points to common signatures with dynamical phase transitions between “mobile” and “immobile” phases in other disordered systems, particularly granular materials, colloids, and foams. Viewing landscape evolution from the lens of non-equilibrium statistical physics of disordered systems leads to predictions that the transition of bulk measurements such as particle flux is continuous from one phase to another, that the collective nature of the particle dynamics leads to very slow aging of bulk properties, and that the dynamics are history-dependent. Recent results from sediment transport experiments support these predictions, suggesting that existing geomorphic transport laws may need to be replaced by a new generation of stochastic models with ingredients based on the physics of disordered phase transitions. We discuss possible strategies for extracting the necessary information to develop these models from measurements of geomorphic transport noise by connecting particle-scale collective dynamics and space-time fluctuations over landscape features.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85960", "section":"Nonlinear Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85961" } }
{"authors":"Luke Ziemba::NASA Langley Research Center--Robert Martin::NASA Langley Research Center--Richard Moore::NASA Langley Research Center--Michael Shook::Science Systems and Applications, Inc.--Kenneth Thornhill::Science Systems and Applications, Inc. Hampton--Edward Winstead::Science Systems and Applications, Inc. Hampton--Bruce Anderson::NASA Langley Research Center--", "title":"A13D-0372: In-Flight Chemical Composition Observations of Aircraft Emissions using a High-Resolution Time-of-Flight Aerosol Mass Spectrometer", "abstract":"Commercial aircraft are an important source of aerosols to the upper troposphere. The microphysical and chemical properties of these emitted aerosols govern their ability to act as ice nuclei, both in near-field contrails and for cirrus formation downstream. During the ACCESS-II (Alternative Fuel Effects on Contrails and Cruise Emissions) campaign, NASA DC-8 CFM56-2-C1 engine emissions were sampled systematically at a range of cruise-relevant thrust levels and at several altitudes. Sampling was done aboard the NASA HU-25 Falcon aircraft, which was equipped with a suite of aerosol and gas-phase instruments focused on assessing the effects of burning different fuel mixtures on aerosol properties and their associated contrails. Here we present in-flight measurements of particle chemical composition made by a High-Resolution Time-of-Flight Aerosol Mass Spectrometer (HR-ToF-AMS). The AMS was able to sufficiently resolve near-field (within 100m) aircraft emissions plumes. Low-sulfur HEFA (hydro-processed esters and fatty-acids) and JetA fuels yielded particles that contained 11 and 8% sulfate, respectively, compared to 30% sulfate contribution for traditional JetA fuel. Each of the fuels produced organic aerosol with similarly low oxygen content. Lubrication oils, which are not a combustion product but result from leaks in the engine, were likely a dominant fraction of the measured organic mass based on mass-spectral marker analysis. These results are compared to similar engine conditions from ground-based testing.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85961", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85962" } }
{"authors":"Zachary Ross::University of Southern California--Yehuda Ben-Zion::University of Southern California--Lupei Zhu::Saint Louis University Main Campus--Robert Graves::USGS California Water Science Center Menlo Park--", "title":"S51A-2662: Full source tensor inversions of San Jacinto fault zone earthquakes using 3D Green’s functions with the gCAP method", "abstract":"We perform a full source tensor inversion of several M > 4 earthquakes that occurred in the San Jacinto fault zone in southern California, with an emphasis on resolving signatures of volumetric source changes. A previous study on these events with Green’s functions based on a 1D velocity model identified statistically significant explosive isotropic components (Ross et al. 2015). Here we use the SCEC 3D Community Velocity Model to derive Green’s functions with source-receiver reciprocity and finite-difference calculations based on the code of Graves (1996). About 50 stations are used at epicentral distances of up to 55 km. The inversions are performed using the ‘generalized Cut and Paste’ method, which includes CLVD and isotropic components (Zhu and Ben-Zion 2013). The derived source tensors are compared to the results of the previous study based on the simplified 1D velocity model. The results are analyzed with bootstrap analysis to estimate uncertainties involved. Additional tests are performed using synthetic waveforms to study the effects of neglecting various features on the source inversions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85962", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85963" } }
{"authors":"Geoffrey Plumlee::U.S. Geological Survey--", "title":"PA23C-04: Intriguing Connections Between Economic Geology, the Environment, Human Health, and Disasters: Observations from my Career(s) in Transdisciplinary Science", "abstract":"I have been fortunate to be able to follow a varied career path from economic geology, to environmental geochemistry, to geochemistry and human health, to environmental disasters. I have been privileged to collaborate with many exceptional scientists from across and well beyond the earth sciences (e.g., public heath, engineering, economics, emergency response, microbiology). Much of this transdisciplinary work has intriguing links back to economic geology/geochemistry. Geological characteristics of different ore deposit types predictably influence the environmental and health impacts of mining, and so can help anticipate and prevent adverse impacts before they occur. Geologic maps showing potential for natural occurrences of asbestos or erionite are analogous to permissive tract maps used for mineral-resource assessments, and can be correlated with epidemiological data to help understand whether living on or near such rocks poses a risk for developing asbestos-related diseases. Mineral particles that are taken up by the human body along inhalation or incidental ingestion exposure routes are “weathered” by reactions with diverse body fluids that differ greatly in composition between and along the different exposure routes. These in vivo chemical reactions (e.g., dissolution, alteration, metal complexation, oxidation/reduction, reprecipitation) are in ways analogous to processes of ore deposit formation and weathering, and some can be shown (in collaboration with toxicologists) to play a role in toxicity. Concepts of ore petrography and paragenesis can be applied to interpret (in collaboration with pathologists) the origin, physiological implications, and toxicity effects of mineral matter in human tissue samples obtained by biopsy, transplant or autopsy. Some disaster materials can originate from mining- or mineral-processing sources, and methods originally developed to study ore deposits or mining-environmental issues can also be applied to understand many disaster materials. These examples illustrate an appropriate core role for earth scientists in transdisciplinary research: applying our expertise and toolkits to help understand topics well beyond earth sciences, but doing so in collaboration with experts from disciplines that traditionally examine those topics.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85963", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85964" } }
{"authors":"Kimberly Reed::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Stephen Nesbitt::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--", "title":"H12E-04: An uncertainty model for snowfall rate retrievals from the GPM DPR", "abstract":"In this presentation, a simple version of the operational GPM DPR retrieval algorithm will be used to explore uncertainties in snowfall rate retrievals using single-frequency and dual-frequency retrieval methods. This model will be used to quantify uncertainties in retrieval of the profile of snowfall rate within the column as well as at the surface below clutter ranges. The DPR uncertainty model will use data from GPM-GV field campaigns including C3VP (Canadian CloudSat/CALIPSO Validation Programme, conducted in 2007 near Barrie, Ontario, Canada) and GCPEx (Global Precipitation Measurement mission Cold Season Precipitation Experiment, conducted in 2012 near Barrie, Ontario, Canada) to gather a priori microphysical assumptions from surface disdrometer and aircraft data. These assumptions will be used to explore the impact of varying a priori assumptions on measured dual frequency radar profiles observed in snowfall from the ground, aircraft, and spaceborne radars to ascertain sensitivities and key parameters which cause the snowfall rate retrievals to vary in the profile and at the surface. The variability in snowfall parameters the near surface bins within spaceborne radar measurements will also be examined, and suggestions for the treatment of these bins in algorithms will be addressed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85964", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85965" } }
{"authors":"Anne Jensen::University of Alaska Fairbanks Bryn Mawr College--", "title":"GC11G-1108: Distributed Observing Networks of the Past: Using Archaeological Sites to Study Global Change", "abstract":"The Arctic is changing rapidly, and there is much concern over what the effects of those changes might be. Although changes of considerable magnitude have happened in the past, current understanding of Arctic systems is not yet sufficient to enable useful predictions. Scientific observations span a very limited period in the Arctic, and do not encompass even fairly recent (Little Ice Age, Medieval Climate Anomaly) periods of climate change. One way to address this would be to extend the period of observation, but the situation is urgent. As an alternative, various types of proxy data can serve a similar function. It is suggested that archaeological sites with good organic preservation are not only sources of data on past human behavior and cultural organization, but also valuable resources for paleoenvironmental reconstruction, with potential similar to other paleoenvironmental proxy records. The sites tend to be located at or near places that are still occupied today, thus providing locally relevant data. They also tend to incorporate the same range of species that are important for subsistence and food security today, so that one can examine how changes affected those species in the past in a fairly direct manner. Yet, just as new methods increase our ability to retrieve and study this information, global climate change poses a dire threat, both to the wealth of organic data in such sites, and to many of the sites themselves. Global change-related threats including increased coastal erosion and the warming and thawing of permafrost are major and imminent threats to the archaeological and paleoecological record.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85965", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85967" } }
{"authors":"William Ouimet::University of Connecticut--Timothy Byrne::University of Connecticut--Chung Huang::Department of Geoscience, National Taiwan University--Paul Bierman::University of Vermont--Yuan-Hsi Lee::CCU National Chung Cheng University--Wei-Hao Hsu::Department of Geoscience, National Taiwan University--Meng-Long Hsieh::CCU National Chung Cheng University--Matthijs Van Soest::Arizona State University--", "title":"T32B-02: Extreme landscape disequilibrium and slow erosion during rapid mountain building", "abstract":"In this study, we examine topography and erosion in Taiwan, where high rates of tectonic convergence, easily erodible bedrock, and a highly erosive climate have produced some of the steepest landscapes and highest erosion rates in the world. Through a combined analysis of topography throughout the Central Range and cosmogenic radionulcide 10Be erosion rates measured in quartz purified from river sediment, we show that Taiwan preserves broad (up to 10-20 km2) areas of anomalous, low slope, low relief terrain and exhibits a wide range of short-term (103-104 yr) 10Be erosion rates (0.1 to ~10 mm/yr) within topography that has been exhuming at 3-5 mm/yr for at least the past 1.5 Ma. The extreme landscape disequilibrium observed in Taiwan highlights the variation in erosion and morphology that mountain belts can exhibit despite strong tectonic forcing and a highly erosive climate. The wide range in cosmogenic erosion rates observed in Taiwan is a direct consequence of the presence of low slope, low relief topography within a rapid uplifting and exhuming orogen. Low relief, slowly eroding areas are consistently found at high elevations near the main topographic divide of the Central Range and in the upstream headwaters where it is more likely to preserve relict topography. Their existence in combination with constant, rapid background exhumation suggest that Taiwan has seen large scale shifts in mean elevation over the last 2 Ma, a conclusion that challenges classic notion of orogeny evolution in Taiwan, the archetype example of arc-continent collision and rapid mountain around the world. Conversely, because Taiwan exhibits rapid rock uplift, frequent landslides and high rates of erosion, it may be the type landscape where dynamic landscape process of river capture and in situ formation of low relief landscape allow for the highest range of millennial scale erosion rates anywhere in the world. Either way, this study highlights that spatial variation erosion rate and landscape morphology (e.g., slope, relief) is possible within rapidly deforming mountain belts, with important implications for interpreting tectonics and factors controlling landscape evolution.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85967", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85968" } }
{"authors":"James O'Donnell::University of Connecticut--", "title":"PA41A-2159: The Potential Effect of Sea Level Rise on Coastal Property Values", "abstract":"It is well established that one consequence of increasing global sea level is that the frequency of flooding at low-lying coastal sites will increase. We review recent evidence that the effects coastal geometry will create substantial spatial variations in the changes in flooding frequency with scales of order 100km. Using a simple model of the evolution of coastal property values we demonstrate that a consequence of sea level rise is that the appreciation of coastal properties will peak, and then decline relative to higher properties. The time when the value reach a maximum is shown to depend upon the demand for the coastal property, and the local rate of change of flooding frequency due to sea level rise. The simple model is then extended to include, in an elementary manner, the effects on the value of adjacent but higher properties. We show that the effect of increased flooding frequency of the lower properties leads to an accelerated appreciation of the value of upland properties and an accelerated decline in the value of the coastal properties. We then provide some example calculations for selected sites. We conclude with a discussion of comparisons of the prediction of the analyses to recent data, and then comments on the impact of sea level rise on tax base of coastal communities.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85968", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85969" } }
{"authors":"Melinda Smith::Colorado State University Colorado State University--David Hoover::USGS--Kevin Wilcox::University of Oklahoma--Andrew Felton::Colorado State University--Alan Knapp::Colorado State University--", "title":"B52C-06: Ecosystem response to multiple drought events: the role of legacy effects", "abstract":"Climate extremes, such as drought and heat waves, are forecast to be more frequent and severe with climate change. As a consequence, such events will become increasingly important drivers of future ecosystem dynamics and function. We experimentally imposed two extreme growing season drought events in a central US grassland to assess the impacts of multiple droughts on ecosystem response and recovery dynamics. The first extreme drought (with growing season precipitation totals lower than the driest two year period of the 1930s US Dust Bowl)reduced aboveground net primary productivity (ANPP) below the lowest level measured in this grassland for almost thirty years. The extreme reduction in ecosystem function with the first two-year drought was a consequence of reduced productivity of the two dominant functional groups in this grassland - C4 grasses and C3 forbs. However, the most abundant (dominant) C3 forb was negatively impacted by the drought more than the dominant C4 grass. This differential sensitivity led to a reordering of species abundances within the plant community. Yet, despite this large shift in plant community composition, which persisted post-drought, ANPP recovered completely the year after drought. This rapid recovery in function was due to a rapid demographic response by the dominant C4 grass, which compensated for loss of the dominant C3 forb. Because of this shift in composition to greater C4 grass dominance, we expected that the second drought would have a greater impact on ecosystem function of plots that had not experienced drought. However, contrary to these expectations, previously droughted plots were more sensitive to drought than those plots that had not experienced drought. Thus, the legacy of drought (shift in community composition) made this grassland more sensitive to subsequent drought. Overall, our results suggest that low resistance of ecosystem function to an extreme climatic event does not preclude rapid ecosystem recovery. However, despite rapid recovery from drought, legacies of drought may increase sensitivity to future extreme events.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85969", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85970" } }
{"authors":"Justin Ball::University of Colorado at Boulder--Anne Sheehan::University of Colorado at Boulder--Josh Stachnik::Lehigh University--Fan-Chi Lin::University of Utah--John Collins::WHOI--", "title":"T41D-2929: Lithospheric Shear Velocity Structure of South Island, New Zealand from Rayleigh Wave Tomography of Amphibious Array Data", "abstract":"We present the first 3D shear velocity model extending well offshore of New Zealand's South Island, imaging the lithosphere beneath Campbell and Challenger plateaus. Our model is constructed via linearized inversion of both teleseismic (18 –70 s period) and ambient noise-based (8 – 25 s period) Rayleigh wave dispersion measurements. We augment an array of 29 ocean-bottom instruments deployed off the South Island’s east and west coasts in 2009-2010 with 28 New Zealand land-based seismometers. The ocean-bottom seismometers and 4 of the land seismometers were part of the Marine Observations of Anisotropy Near Aotearoa (MOANA) experiment, and the remaining land seismometers are from New Zealand’s permanent GeoNet array. Major features of our shear wave velocity (Vs) model include a low-velocity (Vs<4.3km/s) body extending to at least 75km depth beneath the Banks and Otago peninsulas, a high-velocity (Vs~4.7km/s) upper mantle anomaly underlying the Southern Alps to a depth of 100km, and discontinuous lithospheric velocity structure between eastern and western Challenger Plateau. Using the 4.5km/s contour as a proxy for the lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary, our model suggests that the lithospheric thickness of Challenger Plateau is substantially greater than that of Campbell Plateau. The high-velocity anomaly we resolve beneath the central South Island exhibits strong spatial correlation with subcrustal earthquake hypocenters along the Alpine Fault (Boese et al., 2013). The ~400km-long low velocity zone we image beneath eastern South Island underlies Cenozoic volcanics and mantle-derived helium observations (Hoke et al., 2000) on the surface. The NE-trending low-velocity zone dividing Challenger Plateau in our model underlies a prominent magnetic discontinuity (Sutherland et al., 1999). The latter feature has been interpreted to represent a pre-Cretaceous crustal boundary, which our results suggest may involve the entire mantle lithosphere.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85970", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85971" } }
{"authors":"Eyal Saiet::University of Alaska Fairbanks--", "title":"C53B-0784: High-Resolution Sea Ice Topography Mapping using UAS-based Sensors and Structure-from-Motion Techniques", "abstract":"Digital Elevation Models (DEMs) of sea-ice are key descriptors of the surface boundary between ice and atmosphere. High resolution (meter-scale) and accurate (cm-scale) DEM data are required to correctly understand surface-atmosphere interactions in arctic environments. Beyond that, high-quality DEM data is also needed to understand sea ice stability and quantify the suitability of sea ice as a means of navigation both on and through the ice. Due to the stringent accuracy requirements of sea ice topography mapping, Lidar data are often used to generate sea ice DEMs. Despite their proven performance, Lidar sensors are expensive and difficult to operate especially in harsh and remote Arctic environments. Hence, alternative more efficient solutions need to be found. To address this issue, this study is investigating the applicability of two recent technical innovations to sea ice DEM production: (1) We analyze the performance of Structure from Motion (SfM) techniques for sea ice topography mapping. SfM is an image processing technique that has recently gained momentum in the geosciences and enables high-quality DEM production from images of uncalibrated off-the-shelf cameras; (2) we investigate the applicability of Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) as platform for our camera systems. UAS have significant advantages for Arctic applications due to their high flexibility, low-cost, and ability to fly in environments deemed risky for manned operations. Combined, SfM and UAS may result in an intriguing alternative to traditional sensors. Using data from a 2015 field campaign near Barrow, Alaska, we showcase the DEM measurement performance that can be achieved with UAS-based sensors and SfM processing. In addition to showing examples of DEM products, we will provide results of an extensive performance analysis where DEM measurements were compared to ground observations and DEMs from alternative sources. To analyze the impact of flight-track information on DEM quality, we first process our data with high-quality flight track information and investigate the degradation of DEM accuracy as flight-track accuracy is reduced. We also investigate the impact of lighting conditions—an important issue in the Arctic—on SfM performance.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85971", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85972" } }
{"authors":"Lindsey Heagy::University of British Columbia--Rowan Cockett::University of British Columbia--Seogi Kang::University of British Columbia--Doug Oldenburg::University of British Columbia--", "title":"ED51A-0807: Real simulation tools in introductory courses: packaging and repurposing our research code.", "abstract":"Numerical simulations are an important tool for scientific research and applications in industry. They provide a means to experiment with physics in a tangible, visual way, often providing insights into the problem. Over the last two years, we have been developing course and laboratory materials for an undergraduate geophysics course primarily taken by non-geophysics majors, including engineers and geologists. Our aim is to provide the students with resources to build intuition about geophysical techniques, promote curiosity driven exploration, and help them develop the skills necessary to communicate across disciplines.  Using open-source resources and our existing research code, we have built modules around simulations, with supporting content to give student interactive tools for exploration into the impacts of input parameters and visualization of the resulting fields, fluxes and data for a variety of problems in applied geophysics, including magnetics, seismic, electromagnetics, and direct current resistivity. The content provides context for the problems, along with exercises that are aimed at getting students to experiment and ask ‘what if...?’ questions. In this presentation, we will discuss our approach for designing the structure of the simulation-based modules, the resources we have used, challenges we have encountered, general feedback from students and instructors, as well as our goals and roadmap for future improvement. We hope that our experiences and approach will be beneficial to other instructors who aim to put simulation tools in the hands of students.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85972", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85974" } }
{"authors":"Douglas Mackay::University of California Davis--Nicholas de Sieyes::University of California Davis--Juan Peng::University of California Davis--Radomir Schmidt::University of California Davis--Maya Buelow::University of California Davis--Mark Felice::University of California Davis--", "title":"H41J-05: Fate of Methane and Ethanol-Blended Fuels in Soil: Laboratory and Field Experiments", "abstract":"Our research site is within the UC Davis Putah Creek Riparian Reserve in Davis, CA; climate is semi-arid and soils are sandy loams and silts. We are conducting three types of controlled release experiments in the field: 1) Gas mixture, a continuous release of methane, sometimes with other gases included, with the composition and release rate changing over time to allow examination of various hypotheses, 2) E10 (gasoline with 10% ethanol): a continuous release of E10 NAPL at rate equal to documented low rate releases from underground storage tanks (USTs) that are difficult or impossible to detect with current practical approaches (<0.04 gallons per day); 3) E85: release at same rate as the E10 release. In the field experiments, gas or NAPL is released from a stainless steel drive point with 0.5 cm slotted section at 1 m bgs; we monitor temperature, pressure, moisture content, and soil gas composition in the soil, and efflux of carbon dioxide, methane, oxygen, water vapor, and other species to/ from soil to atmosphere. Periodic coring allows examination of the microbial community composition with depth. Laboratory microcosm and column tests assisted in planning the E10 and E85 field experiments above, evaluated the effect of moisture content on methane oxidation, and allowed testing and refinement of the monitoring approaches in the field We found that up to 40% of the methane released can be accounted for by efflux from soil to the atmosphere. The percentage in the efflux depends on the rate of release, and, based on literature and our microcosms with methane-spiked PCRR soils, we hypothesize that the very low moisture content of the soils in this drought year limits in situ methane oxidation. Efflux of carbon dioxide accounted for up to 20% of the E10 release rate under our lab column conditions, which we believe were oxygen-limited compared to the field conditions. We also detected low molecular weight hydrocarbons in the column efflux, though the concentrations were small and the total efflux accounted for a very small fraction of the E10 release rate. On the basis of the lab tests, the field experiments for E10 and E85 release were started in 2015. Selected results of these experiments will be discussed in the conference presentation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85974", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85975" } }
{"authors":"Seulgi Jeong::Seoul National University--Dong Kun Lee::Seoul National University--Wookju Jeong::Seoul National University--Seung Gyu Jeong::Seoul National University--Yihua Jin::Seoul National University--", "title":"PA51C-2222: Assessing Ecological Impacts According to Land Use Change", "abstract":"Land use patterns have changed by human activities, and it has affected the structure and dynamics of ecosystems. In particular, the conversion of forests into other land use has caused environmental degradation and loss of biodiversity. The evaluation of species and their habitat can be preferentially considered to prevent or minimize the adverse effects of land use change. The objective of study is identifying the impacts of environmental conditions on forest ecosystems by comparing ecological changes with time series spatial data. Species distribution models were developed for diverse species with presence data and time-series environmental variables, which allowed comparison of the habitat suitability and connectivity. Habitat suitability and connectivity were used to estimate impacts of forest ecosystems due to land use change. Our result suggested that the size and degree of ecological impacts are were different depending on the properties of land use change. The elements and species were greatly affected by the land use change according to the results. This study suggested that a methodology for measuring the interference of land use change in species habitat and connectivity. Furthermore, it will help to conserve and manage forest by identifying priority conservation areas with influence factor and scale.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85975", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85976" } }
{"authors":"Rachel Pinker::Univ Maryland--Banglin Zhang::Univ Maryland--Yingtao Ma::Univ Maryland--", "title":"A31C-0056: Trends in Surface Radiation Budgets at Climatic Time Scales", "abstract":"For assessment of variability and trends in the Earth Radiation Balance, information is needed at climatic time scales. Satellite observations have been instrumental for advancing the understanding of radiative balance at global scale, however, the length of available satellite records is limited due to the frequent changes in the observing systems. In this paper we report on an effort to synthesize satellite observations from independent sources to estimates shortwave and longwave surface radiative fluxes at climatic time scales and use them to learn about their variability and trends at global scale with a focus on the tropics. An attempt will be made to learn from the comparison about possible causes of observed trends. The radiative fluxes were derived in the framework of the MEaSURES and NEWS programs; they are evaluated against ground observations and compared to independent satellite and model estimates. Attention is given to updated knowledge on radiative balance as compared to what is known from shorter time records.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85976", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85977" } }
{"authors":"Igor Kaganovich::Princeton University--Peter Porazik::Princeton University--Jay Johnson::Princeton University--Ennio Sanchez::SRI International Menlo Park--", "title":"SM13E-2565: Investigation of the relativistic beam propagation in the magnetospheric plasma environment.", "abstract":"Advancements in accelerator technology have recently made it possible for a spaceraft to carry aboard a compact linear accelerator capable of producing electron beams of relativistic energies. Relativistic electron beams are generally more stable than nonrelativistic ones and can thus propagate for long distances. This makes them ideal for active space experiments. We present a study of the propagation and stability of a relativistic electron beam in a magnetospheric environment. We solve the envelope equations to determine the evolution of the beam radius and its dependence on the ambient plasma parameters. Particle-in-cell simulations are used to form a more detailed picture of the beam stability and propagation, and to verify the envelope solutions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85977", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85978" } }
{"authors":"Xieyao Ma::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--Sachiho Adachi::RIKEN Advanced Institute for Computational Science--Hiroaki Kawase::Meteorological Research Institute--Takao Yoshikane::Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute, The University of Tokyo--Masayuki Hara::Center for Environmental Science in Saitama--Chieko Suzuki::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--", "title":"H51K-1548: Long-term river discharge simulation using dataset derived by WRF model", "abstract":"Reanalysis data necessary to climate modeling research are numerous available now. In this study, we checked the performance of river discharge simulation by using a regional climate model output produced with NCEP/NCAR (ds090.0), ERA-Interim and JRA25 reanalysis datasets in two decades, 1980s and 1990s. The Weather Research and Forecast model (ver. 3.2.1) was used in this study. The horizontal resolutions were 18km and 4.5km for outer and inner domains, respectively. The period of simulation is 20-year from Oct. 1980 to Oct. 2000. Five river basins (Agano River, Jinzu River Mogami River, Shinano River and Tone River) were selected to compare the observed and calculated river discharges.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85978", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85979" } }
{"authors":"Manuel Pulido-Velazquez::Universitat Politècnica de València--Antonio Lopez-Nicolas::Universitat Politècnica de València--Hector Macian-Sorribes::Universitat Politècnica de València--", "title":"H34F-07: Assessing the potential of economic instruments for managing drought risk at river basin scale", "abstract":"Economic instruments work as incentives to adapt individual decisions to collectively agreed goals. Different types of economic instruments have been applied to manage water resources, such as water-related taxes and charges (water pricing, environmental taxes, etc.), subsidies, markets or voluntary agreements. Hydroeconomic models (HEM) provide useful insight on optimal strategies for coping with droughts by simultaneously analysing engineering, hydrology and economics of water resources management. We use HEMs for evaluating the potential of economic instruments on managing drought risk at river basin scale, considering three criteria for assessing drought risk: reliability, resilience and vulnerability. HEMs allow to calculate water scarcity costs as the economic losses due to water deliveries below the target demands, which can be used as a vulnerability descriptor of drought risk. Two generic hydroeconomic DSS tools, SIMGAMS and OPTIGAMS ( both programmed in GAMS) have been developed to evaluate water scarcity cost at river basin scale based on simulation and optimization approaches. The simulation tool SIMGAMS allocates water according to the system priorities and operating rules, and evaluate the scarcity costs using economic demand functions. The optimization tool allocates water resources for maximizing net benefits (minimizing total water scarcity plus operating cost of water use). SIMGAS allows to simulate incentive water pricing policies based on water availability in the system (scarcity pricing), while OPTIGAMS is used to simulate the effect of ideal water markets by economic optimization. These tools have been applied to the Jucar river system (Spain), highly regulated and with high share of water use for crop irrigation (greater than 80%), where water scarcity, irregular hydrology and groundwater overdraft cause droughts to have significant economic, social and environmental consequences. An econometric model was first used to explain the variation of the production value of irrigated agriculture during droughts, assessing revenue responses to varying crop prices and water availability. Hydroeconomic approaches were then used to show the potential of economic instruments in setting incentives for a more efficient management of water resources systems.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85979", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85980" } }
{"authors":"Courtney Reijo::University of Florida - UF--Matthew Cohen::Univ Florida-SFRC--", "title":"B11F-0492: Grazer Effects on Stream Primary Production and Nitrate Utilization: Estimating Feedbacks Under Reduced Nitrate Levels at High-Temporal Resolutions from the Patch to Reach-Scale", "abstract":"While nutrient enrichment is often identified as the leading cause for changes in stream gross primary production (GPP) and shifts in vegetative communities, other factors such as grazers influence overall stream structure and function. Evidence shows that grazers are a top-down control on algae in streams; however, the specific feedbacks between overall stream metabolism, grazer effects, and nutrient cycling have been variable and little is known about these interactions at nutrient levels below ambient. To further our understanding of these linkages, a nutrient depletion chamber was created and paired with high-resolution in situ sensors to estimate stream metabolism and characterize nitrate uptake (UNO3) pathways (i.e. plant uptake and denitrification). The Plexiglas chamber blocks flow and nutrient supply, inserts into upper sediments, allows light in and sediment-water-air interactions to occur. At Gum Slough Springs, FL, nitrate was reduced from ambient levels (1.40 mg N/L) to below regulatory thresholds (ca. 0.20 mg N/L) within one week. Paired chambers with and without the presence of snails (Elimia floridensis) were deployed across submerged aquatic vegetation (SAV; Vallisneria americana) and algae (Lyngbya) substrates. Results show that GPP and UNO3 were higher under SAV (70 g O2/m2/d and 300 mg NO3/m2/d, respectively) and a general lack of nutrient limitation even at low [NO3]. Grazer effects differed by vegetation type as it alleviated the reduction of NO3 levels and GPP under SAV but enhanced the decrease of algal GPP and NO3 levels over time. Continued work includes estimating grazer effects on denitrification, quantifying snail nutrient excretion contributions, and scaling up all estimates from the patch to reach level. Overall, this study will further our understanding of grazer-production-nutrient interactions within stream systems, making it possible to predict changes in feedbacks when one part of the biotic or abiotic ecosystem is altered.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85980", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85983" } }
{"authors":"Christopher Junium::Syracuse University--Jeffrey Karson::Syracuse University--Tara Kahan::Syracuse University--", "title":"P33A-2127: THE PRESERVATION OF ORGANIC MATTER AND ITS SIGNATURES AT EXPERIMENTAL LAVA FLOW INTERFACES: IMPLICATIONS FOR MARS", "abstract":"The oxidizing nature of Martian soils suggests that the preservation of organic molecules or any direct evidence for life at the surface may not be possible. Future rover missions will need to focus on a variety localitions including those that provide the best possibility for the preservation of organic matter. Volcanic glass and basalt flow surfaces are favored environments for microbial colonization on Earth and this may have been similar on an early Mars. Trace metals and nutrients from easily weathered surface would have provided nutrients as well as substrates for chemolithoautotrophs. In regions of igneous activity, successive flows could overrun microbial communities, trapping potential organic signatures between flows. Here we present experimental evidence for the preservation of organic matter between lava flows and that flow interfaces may be excellent sites for exploratory efforts in the search for Martian biosignatures. We performed a series of experiments using the infrastructure of the Syracuse Lava Project that allows for natural-scale lava flows of up to several hundred kilograms. We subjected cyanobacterial organic matter to overrun by lava under a variety of conditions. In all cases organic matter was preserved between lava flows as chars on the overrun ‘colonized” lava and as thin shiny carbon coatings on the overriding flow. The carbon coatings are likely the result of rapid heating and pyrolysis of organic matter that sears to the underside of the overriding lava. Controls yielded no positive signatures for organic matter. We also tested the degree to which the organic matter could be detected remotely using technologies that are found on the Mars Science Laboratory or planned for future missions. We employed elemental and stable isotopes analysis, and Raman spectroscopy. Elemental analysis demonstrated that organic carbon and nitrogen remain in the charred material and that the carbon and nitrogen isotopes of the chars do not deviate significantly from the precursor organic matter (-24.3‰ cyanobacterial biomass; -24.2‰ black carbon). Raman spectroscopy revealed spectra for black carbon, even from the thinnest carbon coatings on overriding lava surfaces. These findings demonstrate that if organic matter is preserved beneath lava flows it may be readily detectable.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85983", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85984" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"GC51B-1093: Providing farmers, ranchers, and foresters in California with actionable climate information: opportunities and obstacles for California’s USDA Regional Climate Sub Hub", "abstract":"California is the #1 agricultural state in the US, with output worth $50 billion in 2014. California produces half the nation’s specialty crops (fruits, vegetables, and nuts) and is a leader in beef and dairy production. California also has 10% of the forestland west of the Mississippi, including many economically and ecologically important forest types. The USDA Regional Climate Sub Hub for California was created in 2014 to help land users (farmers, ranchers, and forest land owners) cope with climate variability and change, via two-way linkages with producers of climate information. In its first year and a half, the Sub Hub has formed partnerships with California’s many other climate-focused organizations, including state and federal government, universities, and NGOs. The Sub Hub coordinates climate-related work among several USDA agencies (ARS, FS, NRCS, and others), which formerly had no mechanism to do so. The Sub Hub also works with other federal climate programs (such as the DOI’s CA Landscape Conservation Cooperative, with which the Sub Hub is engaged in a multi-year assessment to balance conservation and agriculture in the Central Valley). State government agencies, such as the Natural Resources Agency and the Department of Food and Agriculture, are key partners for priority-setting and data-sharing. One of the Sub Hub’s crucial synergies is with UC Cooperative Extension, which provides insight into land users’ needs and provides an outlet to deliver Sub Hub products on the ground. In response to stakeholder concerns, the Sub Hub’s 2015-16 emphasis is the ongoing California drought. The Sub Hub’s current stakeholder-focused projects include (1) a climate vulnerability assessment of California rangelands, including detailed maps of likely vegetation change and suggestions for location-specific adaptation options; (2) a comprehensive climate-related update of Cooperative Extension’s widely used Forest Stewardship Series for private landowners; (3) a study on climate information needs of California nut growers; and (4) a series of sector-specific fact sheets on drought impacts and adaptation. To succeed, these efforts must acknowledge that land users do not seek climate information in isolation; rather, they need to integrate it with other components of their decision-making.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85984", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85985" } }
{"authors":"Anna Foster::Earth Observatory of Singapore--Shengji Wei::Nanyang Technological University--Baoshan Wang::IGP Institute of Geophysics, China Earthquake Administration--", "title":"S43D-2834: Seismic Investigations of the Central Nepal Region Using Teleseismic and Local Earthquakes", "abstract":"Central Nepal encompasses a tectonically interesting and hazardous region. The general structure of the Himalayan orogen is known, but the details are not. These details are important when it comes to understanding the large thrust earthquakes that can occur in the region, such as the Mw7.8 25 April 2015 event. We take two approaches to add to the community knowledge about the structure of this area. First, we make new measurements on the existing IRIS Passcal Himalayan Nepal Tibet (HIMNT) data set. This array was operated from late 2001 through 2002. We collect two-station phase measurements for Rayleigh waves from teleseismic events at periods of 25 to 125 s. We estimate the uncertainty in these measurements, and invert the weighted measurements to produce phase-velocity models covering an area from 85˚ to 88˚ longitude, and 26˚ to 30˚ latitude. We evaluate the models on several grid sizes, and select the preferred model based on data coverage and uncertainty estimates. The second approach is to better constrain the focal mechanisms and depths of aftershocks of the 25 April 2015 event. We use the Cut and Paste (CAP) method with locally and regionally recorded waveforms (<30˚ distance), as well as teleseismic body waves. We use a 1-D velocity model based on the phase-velocity results from HIMNT, and experiment with varying this 1-D model for different event-station paths. We use both body waves and surface waves, where possible, and perform a grid search over depth. The dip and depth of the focal mechanisms provide important information on the geometry of the plate interface, and potentially of smaller thrusts, and add constraints on the interpretation of the phase-velocity models.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85985", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85986" } }
{"authors":"Ursula Ruiz Vera::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Nuria Gomez-Casanovas::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Carl Bernacchi::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign Global Change and Photosynthesis Research Unit, Agricultural Research Service, USDA--Donald Ort::Global Change and Photosynthesis Research Unit, Agricultural Research Service, USDA University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Matthew Siebers::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--", "title":"B43H-0657: Warming does not stimulate mitochondrial respiration and it responds to leaf carbohydrates availability in soybean plants grown under elevated CO2 concentrations", "abstract":"There is a lack of understanding on the mechanism underlying the response of mitochondrial respiration (Rs) to the single and combined effects of increasing CO2 concentration ([CO2]) and warming. We investigated the response of Rs to the single and combined effects of elevated [CO2] and warming in soybean plants over a complete growing season using Temperature by Free Air CO2 enrichment technology under field conditions. The treatments were: control, elevated [CO2] (eC), high temperature (eT), and elevated [CO2]+high temperature (eT+eC). Given that photosynthetic rates in eT+eC grown plants were not higher than in plants grown under eC, we hypothesized that Rs would increase only slightly in plants grown under eT+eC compared to eC plants, due to the increase of temperature. Contrary to our prediction, our preliminary results showed that plants grown under the warming treatments had low Rs, thus eT+eC had lower Rs than eC. The response of Rs to these factors was consistent at two different plant high levels (canopy and five nodes down the canopy). Changes in Rs were explained by variations in the carbohydrate content. Our results indicate that the response of Rs to changes in [CO2] and temperature will depend on the carbohydrate availability of plant tissues and thus on how photosynthesis is affected by this environmental factors.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85986", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85987" } }
{"authors":"Chun Liu::Tongji University--Ping Lu::Tongji University--Hangbin WU::Tongji University--", "title":"NH54A-02: Establishment of Stereo Multi-sensor Network for Giant Landslide Monitoring and its Deploy in Xishan landslide, Sichuan, China.", "abstract":"Landslide is one of the most destructive natural disasters, which severely affects human lives as well as the safety of personal properties and public infrastructures. Monitoring and predicting landslide movements can keep an adequate safety level for human beings in those situations. This paper indicated a newly developed Stereo Multi-sensor Landslide Monitoring Network (SMSLMN) based on a uniform temporal geo-reference. Actually, early in 2003, SAMOA (Surveillance et Auscultation des Mouvements de Terrain Alpins, French) project was put forwarded as a plan for landslide movements monitoring. However, SAMOA project did not establish a stereo observation network to fully cover the surface and internal part of landslide. SMSLMN integrated various sensors, including space-borne, airborne, in-situ and underground sensors, which can quantitatively monitor the slide-body and obtain portent information of movement in high frequency with high resolution. The whole network has been deployed at the Xishan landslide, Sichuan, P.R.China. According to various characteristic of stereo monitoring sensors, observation capabilities indicators for different sensors were proposed in order to obtain the optimal sensors combination groups and observation strategy. Meanwhile, adaptive networking and reliable data communication methods were developed to apply intelligent observation and sensor data transmission. Some key technologies, such as signal amplification and intelligence extraction technology, data access frequency adaptive adjustment technology, different sensor synchronization control technology were developed to overcome the problems in complex observation environment. The collaboratively observation data have been transferred to the remote data center where is thousands miles away from the giant landslide spot. These data were introduced into the landslide stability analysis model, and some primary conclusion will be achieved at the end of paper.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85987", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85989" } }
{"authors":"Kakani Katija::Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute--Alana Sherman::Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute--Dale Graves::Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute--Chad Kecy::Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute--Denis Klimov::Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute--Bruce Robison::Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute--", "title":"EP53E-04: DeepPIV: Measuring in situ Biological-Fluid Interactions from the Surface to Benthos", "abstract":"The midwater region of the ocean (below the euphotic zone and above the benthos) is one of the largest ecosystems on our planet, yet it remains one of the least explored. Little known marine organisms that inhabit midwater have developed strategies for swimming and feeding that ultimately contributes to their evolutionary success, and may inspire engineering solutions for societally relevant challenges. Fluid mechanics governs the interactions that midwater organisms have with their physical environment, but limited access to midwater depths and lack of non-invasive methods to measure in situ small-scale fluid motions prevent these interactions from being better understood. Significant advances in underwater vehicle technologies have only recently improved access to midwater. Unfortunately, in situ small-scale fluid mechanics measurement methods are still lacking in the oceanographic community. Here we present DeepPIV, an instrumentation package that can be affixed to remotely operated underwater vehicles that quantifies small-scale fluid motions from the surface of the ocean down to 4000 m depths. Utilizing ambient, suspended particulate in the coastal regions of Monterey Bay, fluid-structure interactions are evaluated on a range of marine organisms in midwater. Initial science targets include larvaceans, biological equivalents of flapping flexible foils, that create mucus houses to filter food. Little is known about the structure of these mucus houses and the function they play in selectively filtering particles, and these dynamics can serve as particle-mucus models for human health. Using DeepPIV, we reveal the complex structures and flows generated within larvacean mucus houses, and elucidate how these structures function.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85989", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85990" } }
{"authors":"Derek van der Kamp::University of British Columbia--Dan Moore::University of British Columbia--Ian McKendry::University of British Columbia--", "title":"GC33E-1352: Modelling the Spatial Variability of Fuel Moisture Across a Heterogeneous Forested Landscape ", "abstract":"Fuel moisture pays an important role in determining the intensity, behaviour and spatial patterns of forest fires and can vary significantly across a forested landscape. We present a set of models designed to quantify the spatial patterns of near surface drying potential across a landscape with significant variability in above canopy radiation load and canopy coverage. We examined the degree to which these two factors drive drying potential and whether relatively wet and non-burnable areas persist in the landscape during the fire season. Specifically, we measured near-surface temperature and humidity at sites across the landscape, as well as precipitation, solar radiation, and wind speed at a subset of these sites. These observations were then used to evaluate, train, and drive a fuel moisture model that includes sub-components for canopy interception of both precipitation and radiation. The precipitation interception is modelled using a Rutter model approach that accounts for evaporation from the canopy. Radiation interception was modelled using hemispherical photos of the canopy combined with modelled sun locations and ratios of direct to diffuse radiation. A novel model was developed to simulate the moisture of standardized fuel sticks at four different size classes and was evaluated using an independent dataset. Finally, the modelled fuel moisture was used to estimate potential fire-line intensity and ignition probability. Preliminary results indicate that downwelling longwave radiation from the canopy is counteracted by less radiation during the day. This balance leads to smaller spatial variability of daytime minimum fuel moisture which is influenced by both night time and daytime conditions due to moisture storage.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85990", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85991" } }
{"authors":"Cahyadi Nur Cahyadi::Geodesy and Surveying Laboratory--", "title":"T43C-3029: Long Continuous Deformation during 2008-2012 Sumatra Earthquakes Using DINSAR and GPS", "abstract":"Indonesia located in three tectonic plates. This situation caused many earthquakes and long continuous movement of plate tectonics. The island which has big tectonic movement phenomena was Sumatra Island. We monitored long deformation process during interseismic and coseismic of three earthquakes in this Island. The three earthquakes were Mentawai 2008, Padang 2009 and North Sumatra 2012 earthquakes. We used Differential Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (DINSAR) and Global Positioning System (GPS) satellite in order to monitor the displacement. We used GAMIT software for GPS and open source software ROYPAC for DINSAR. Sumatra GPS Array (SUGAR) Networks were used to analyze the displacement rate. The result of displacement was very different year to year, Mw 7.6 Padang earthquake had 15.8 cm up and caused subduction zone of trench Sumatra movement about 1.8 cm to 7 cm up. The displacements was continued by Mw 7.7 Mentawai earthquake 2008. We monitored intersesismic, coseismic and postseismic phase. Coseismic phase was 0.222m in horizontal direction and 0.1415 m in vertical direction (SLBU station). The interseismic phase was smaller about 0.118 m in BSAT stations (south east direction). The biggest deformation was detected during interseismic and postseismic North Sumatra 2012 earthquakes with deformation 0.300-3.00 meter.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85991", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85992" } }
{"authors":"Paola Testa::Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics--Bart De Pontieu::Lockheed Martin Solar and Astrophysics Laboratory--Viggo Hansteen::Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics--", "title":"SH31D-06: Properties of moss emission from joint FeXII IRIS and Hinode observations of active region plasma", "abstract":"IRIS provides unprecedented high resolution observations of the solar chromosphere and transition region. Joint with Hinode XRT and EIS, and SDO/AIA, these observations cover from the upper photosphere to the corona and provide tight constraints on the mechanisms of energy transport and heating of the plasma to coronal temperatures. We present new IRIS and Hinode coronal studies of the corona in non-flaring conditions, and compare the spectral line properties of FeXII emission observed with EIS and IRIS in active region moss. We will discuss the implications for the heating of hot coronal loops in the core of active regions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85992", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85993" } }
{"authors":"Emiliano Monroy-Rios::Northwestern University--Patricia Beddows::Northwestern University--", "title":"EP53A-0979: Hydrogeothermal Convective Circulation Model for the Formation of the Chicxulub Ring of Cenotes in the Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico.", "abstract":"Despite being deeply buried, the topography and geophysical characteristics of the multi-ring Chicxulub impact structure are reflected on the now subaerial Yucatan Peninsula with aligned arcs of cenotes (sinkholes), forming the “Ring of Cenotes”. A pending question is the determination of the geological, geochemical, structural features and associated processes that have led to void development, and the upwards propagation of the voids, cross cutting over 1000 m of super-deposited carbonate sequences. Drawing from the published literature on drill core and geophysical surveys undertaken by Pemex, UNAM, and IODP/ICDP, numerical modeling, and general carbonate platform hydrothermal reactive transport models, we provide a conceptual model for the genesis of the Ring of Cenotes. In horizontally bedded carbonate platforms, geothermal gradients will drive convective flow, with strong vertical components specifically in the platform center. In the Yucatan Platform, a high occurrence of anhydrite and dolomite at depth evokes early burial dolomitization and anhydritization, sourcing Mg from seawater. The Chicxulub impact near the center of the platform produced a low permeability and high thermal conductivity melt rock that arguably extends to the basement rock at 3.5 km below surface. Heat of impact enforced the pre-existing geothermal circulation pattern, and even with depletion of the heat of impact, the high thermal conductivity of the crystalline melt would lead to enhanced geothermal gradients in the center of the platform. The cenotes overlying the crater are deep (150+ m) vertical shafts with most (but not all) breaching the surface. The pit geomorphology suggests a bottom-up formation. Excess Si in the shallow groundwater points to a convective circulation with strong vertical components geochemically linking the granodioritic basement rock to the surface. Water temperature and conductivity profiles support ongoing vertical flux in some deep pit cenotes. Within this framework, we argue for the formation of the Ring of Cenotes by hydrogeothermal convective circulation in the post-impact carbonate sequences, leading to spatially focused dissolution at depth, with voids initiated along the crater edge effectively propagating upwards, often breaching the surface.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85993", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85994" } }
{"authors":"David Hyndman::Michigan State University--Anthony Kendall::Michigan State University--Samuel Smidt::University of Iowa--Jillian Deines::Michigan State University--Xiao Liu::Michigan State University--Kayla Cotterman::Michigan State University--Erin Haacker::Michigan State University--", "title":"H44F-02: Evaluating Water Sustainability across the High Plains Aquifer using Remote Sensing and Process-Based Hydrology Models", "abstract":"Much of the High Plains Aquifer region recently emerged from an extreme drought, which is likely to be a more common condition with projected changes in climate. Water use for agriculture greatly expanded since the early to mid 1900s, partly in response to drought. Over the last several decades there have been significant advances in the efficiency of irrigation technologies, which have changed from flood irrigation, to center pivot, then to LEPA systems. Here we present a synthesis of monitoring and modeling to investigate changes in water availability across this vast region that is dominated by agriculture. Our integrated Landscape Hydrology Model (LHM) was used to quantify hourly hydrologic fluxes including evapotranspiration and groundwater recharge across a range of observed climate conditions including the current drought. These simulations are coupled to groundwater models for the region to investigate the sustainability of current water use practices and the impacts of aquifer depletion on water budgets. Simulations are compared to measured water levels that have been synthesized across the region from presettlement to today, and with remotely sensed estimates from the GRACE satellite. Finally, we present simulations that quantify the likely impacts of projected climate changes from the CMIP5 forecasts of global climate.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85994", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85995" } }
{"authors":"Ryan Perroy::University of Hawaii at Hilo--Nicolas Turner::University of Hawaii--Kenneth Hon::University of Hawaii at Hilo--Victor Rasgado::Hawai Community College--", "title":"V13D-03: Monitoring Inflation and Emplacement During the 2014-2015 Kilauea Lava Flow With an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle", "abstract":"<span`  roman` =` Roman` `  new=` New` >Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) provide a powerful new tool for collecting high resolution on-demand spatial data over volcanic eruptions and other active geomorphic processes. These data can be used to improve hazard forecasts and emergency response efforts, and also allow users to economically and safely observe and quantify lava flow inflation and emplacement on spatially and temporally useful scales. We used a small fixed-wing UAV with a modified point-and-shoot camera to repeatedly map the active front of the 2014-2015 Kīlauea lava flow over a one-month period in late 2014, at times with a two-hour repeat interval. An additional subsequent flight was added in July, 2015. We used the imagery from these flights to generate a time-series of 5-cm resolution RGB and near-infrared orthoimagery mosaics and associated digital surface models using structure from motion. Survey-grade positional control was provided by ground control points with differential GPS. Two topographic transects were repeatedly surveyed across the flow surface, contemporaneously with UAV flights, to independently confirm topographic changes observed in the UAV-derived surface models. Vertical errors were generally 10 cm. Inside our 50 hectare study site, the flow advanced at a rate of 0.47 hectares/day during the first three weeks of observations before abruptly stalling out <200 m from Pahoa Village road. Over 150,000 m3of lava were added to the study site during our period of observations, with maximum vertical inflation >4 m. New outbreak areas, both on the existing flow surface and along the flow margins, were readily mapped across the study area. We detected sinuous growing inflation ridges within the flow surface that correlated with subsequent outbreaks of new lava, suggesting that repeat UAV flights can provide a means of better predicting pahoehoe lava flow behavior over flat or uneven topography. Our results show that UAVs can generate accurate and digital surface models quickly and inexpensively over rapidly changing active pahoehoe lava flows.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85995", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85996" } }
{"authors":"Robert Beach::Research Triangle Institute--", "title":"GC13D-1193: Assessing the Benefits of Global Climate Stabilization Within an Integrated Modeling Framework", "abstract":"Increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide levels, higher temperatures, altered precipitation patterns, and other climate change impacts have already begun to affect US agriculture and forestry, with impacts expected to become more substantial in the future. There have been a number of studies of climate change impacts on agriculture or forestry. However, relatively few studies explore climate change impacts on both agriculture and forests simultaneously, including the interactions between alternative land uses and implications for market outcomes. Additionally, there is a lack of detailed analyses of the effects of stabilization scenarios relative to unabated emissions scenarios. Such analyses are important for developing estimates of the benefits of those stabilization scenarios, which can play a vital role in assessing tradeoffs associated with allocating resources across alternative mitigation and adaptation activities. We provide an analysis of the potential benefits of global climate change mitigation for US agriculture and forestry through 2100, accounting for landowner decisions regarding land use, crop mix, and management practices. The analytic approach involves a combination of climate models, a crop process model (EPIC), a dynamic vegetation model used for forests (MC1), and an economic model of the US forestry and agricultural sector (FASOM-GHG). We find substantial impacts on productivity, commodity markets, and consumer and producer welfare for the stabilization scenario relative to unabated climate change, though the magnitude and direction of impacts vary across regions and commodities. Although there is variability in welfare impacts across climate simulations, we find positive net benefits from stabilization in all cases, with cumulative impacts ranging from $32.7 billion to $54.5 billion over the period 2015-2100. Our estimates contribute to the literature on potential benefits of GHG mitigation and can help inform policy decisions weighing alternative mitigation and adaptation actions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85996", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "85998" } }
{"authors":"Mark Hofstadter::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Samuel Gulkis::California Institute of Technology--Mark Allen::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Paul Von Allmen::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Gerard Beaudin::Observatoire de Paris--Nicolas Biver::LESIA Observatoire de Paris--Dominique Bockelée-Morvan::Paris Observatory--Mathieu Choukroun::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Jacques Crovisier::LESIA Observatoire de Paris--Pierre Encrenaz::Observatoire de Paris--Therese Encrenaz::LESIA Observatoire de Paris--Margaret Frerking::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Paul Hartogh::Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research--Wing-Huen Ip::NCU National Central University of Taiwan--Michael Janssen::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Christopher Jarchow::Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research--Stephen Keihm::JPL/NASA/Caltech--Seungwon Lee::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Emmanuel Lellouch::Observatoire de Paris--Cedric Leyrat::Paris Observatory Meudon--Ladislav Rezac::Max Planck Institute for Solar System Research--F. Peter Schloerb::University of Massachusetts Amherst--Thomas Spilker::Solar System Science and Exploration--", "title":"P33E-06: The Nucleus and Coma of Comet 67P/C-G at Millimeter and Submillimeter Wavelengths as seen by MIRO", "abstract":"The Microwave Instrument on the Rosetta Orbiter (MIRO) makes submillimeter- and millimeter-wavelength observations of Comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko. Broadband continuum measurements at wavelengths of 0.5 and 1.6 mm probe the thermal and dielectric properties of the nucleus subsurface. High-resolution spectroscopic measurements of 8 molecular lines in the submillimeter (H2O, H217O, H218O, CO, NH3, and three lines of CH3OH) constrain the abundance, velocity, and temperature of gases in the coma. These measurements allow MIRO to study the nucleus and coma as a coupled system. Using its two continuum channels, MIRO has mapped the thermal properties of the nucleus subsurface (depths from millimeters to tens of centimeters), and generally finds its properties to be consistent with very porous, dusty material. We see temperature variations due to diurnal and seasonal changes in insolation, and also see evidence for subsurface ice in some regions. This talk will provide an update on our observations of variations over time, variations with temperature, and variations in composition. We also will report on our attempts to detect the continuum thermal emission of dust in the coma. MIRO's spectroscopic observations have shown the abundance and velocity of gas as it comes off the nucleus to vary with time and location. The regions MIRO sees as particularly active are generally consistent with activity reported by other instruments. Moving away from the nucleus, MIRO is sensitive to the three-dimensional structure of the coma. We will present an update on our understanding of that structure, which is influenced by the shape of the nucleus, nucleus rotation, and processes acting within and on the coma. Our ultimate goal is to develop a coupled model of the nucleus and coma, tracing the processes by which solar heating of the surface drives sublimation of subsurface ice and generation of dust, and how gases and dust evolve in the coma. Part of this work was conducted at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under contract to NASA. Part of the research was conducted at the Max-Planck Institute (Göttingen), Obs. de Paris, National Central Univ. (Taiwan), and Univ. of Mass. (Amherst). Government, DLR, CNES, and CNRS sponsorship is acknowledged.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/85998", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86000" } }
{"authors":"Laura Harding::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--Guido Cervone::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--Luca Delle Monache::National Center for Atmospheric Research--", "title":"GC53D-1240: Analog Ensemble Methodology: Expansion and Optimization for Renewable Energy Applications", "abstract":"Renewable energy is fundamental for sustaining and developing society. Solar and wind energy are promising sources because of their decreased environmental impact relative to conventional energy sources, improved efficiency, and increased use. A key challenge with renewable energy production is the generation of accurate renewable energy forecasts at varying spatial and temporal scales to assist utility companies in effective energy management. Specifically, this research applies the Analog Ensemble (AnEn) methodology to short-term (0-48 hour) wind speed forecasting for power generation and short-term (0-72) hour solar power measured (PM) output predictions. AnEn uses a set of past observations corresponding to the best analogs of a deterministic numerical weather prediction model to generate a probability distribution of future atmospheric states: an ensemble of analogs. Currently the AnEn methodology equally weights predictors and only handles 1D(time). We determine an optimal distribution of predictor weights based upon parameter characteristics, investigate spatial variations in the application of the methodology and develop a theory expanding the methodology into 2D. The AnEn methodology improves short-term prediction accuracy, decreases computational costs and provides uncertainty quantification allowing utility companies to manage over- or under power generation for renewable energy sources.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86000", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86004" } }
{"authors":"Chris Castillo::Stanford University--Simon Klemperer::Stanford University--Ethan Williams::Stanford University--Mark Legg::Legg Geophysical--Robert Francis::California State University Long Beach--", "title":"NH21E-02: Tsunamogenic landslides and marine paleoseismology: applications of the submerged marine terrace record, Santa Catalina Island, Southern California Borderland", "abstract":"Transpressional structures related to deformation along the Greater San Andreas Fault are largely responsible for creating the complex morphology and steep topography in the Southern California Borderland. The numerous anastamosing strike slip faults dissecting the area are responsible for creating its complex morphology and present a seismic hazard to nearshore communities. Submarine slope failures tend to nucleate on faulted steep topography and could generate a tsunami dangerously close to densely populated urban areas. We present evidence for a tsunamogenic landslide originating from Catalina Island and directed toward the mainland. Radiometric dates of fossils collected during coring cruises and ROV dives during 2014-15 provide age control for high-resolution 2D and 3D seismic reflection profiles collected near Santa Catalina Island and Pilgrim Banks. These refine our established sequence stratigraphic subsidence history for Catalina Island, and enable us to constrain the timing of the landslide deposit, as well as other landslide deposits and faults. Although the slide is pre-Holocene, the threat of another tsunamogenic landslide directed at urban southern California is increased by gradual tilting of the Catalina block toward mainland California. Our study demonstrates that investigations using a combination of bathymetry, 2D and 3D MCS can be used to map submerged marine terrace deposits and those can then be used as offset markers for paleoseismic investigations. The subsided marine terrace record has potential paleoseismologic applications on over 20 submerged seamounts and islands in Southern California, as well as applications in providing constraints on Quaternary sea level history.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86004", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86005" } }
{"authors":"Wonjae Chang::University of Saskatchewan--Jihun Kim::University of Saskatchewan--Ning Zhu::Canadian Light Source--Joyce McBeth::Canadian Light Source--", "title":"H43F-1569: Visualizing and Quantifying Bioaccessible Pores in Field-Aged Petroleum Hydrocarbon-Contaminated Clay Soils Using Synchrotron-based X-ray Computed Tomography", "abstract":"Microbial hydrocarbon degradation is environmentally significant and applicable to contaminated site remediation practices only when hydrocarbons (substrates) are physically bioaccessible to bacteria in soil matrices. Powerful X-rays are produced by synchrotron radiation, allowing for bioaccessible pores in soil (larger than 4 microns), where bacteria can be accommodated, colonize and remain active, can be visualized at a much higher resolution. This study visualized and quantified such bioaccessible pores in intact field-aged, oil-contaminated unsaturated soil fractions, and examined the relationship between the abundance of bioaccessible pores and hydrocarbon biodegradation. Using synchrotron-based X-ray Computed Tomography (CT) at the Canadian Light Source, a large dataset of soil particle characteristics, such as pore volumes, surface areas, number of pores and pore size distribution, was generated. Duplicate samples of five different soil fractions with different soil aggregate sizes and water contents (13, 18 and 25%) were examined. The method for calculating the number and distribution of bioaccessible pores using CT images was validated using the known porosity of Ottawa sand. This study indicated that the distribution of bioaccessible pore sizes in soil fractions are very closely related to microbial enhancement. A follow-up aerobic biodegradation experiment for the soils at 17 °C (average site temperature) over 90 days confirmed that a notable decrease in hydrocarbon concentrations occurred in soils fractions with abundant bioaccessible pores and with a larger number of pores between 10 and 100 µm. The hydrocarbon degradation in bioactive soil fractions was extended to relatively high-molecular-weight hydrocarbons (C16-C34). This study provides quantitative information about how internal soil pore characteristics can influence bioremediation performance.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86005", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86006" } }
{"authors":"Ekaterina Maksimova::Florida State University--Robert Weisberg::University of South Florida Tampa--", "title":"OS11A-1994: Diurnal/Inertial Oscillations on the West Florida Shelf in the Eastern Gulf of Mexico.", "abstract":"Oscillations of diurnal/inertial frequency on the West Florida Shelf in the Eastern Gulf of Mexico are thought to be seasonally important for mixing the shelf waters because of their tendency to have large vertical shear and to be quite energetic. Such oscillations are also thought to seasonally affect the ecology of the region through daily vertical thermocline migration. The presentation will focus on some novel findings about the diurnal/inertial coastal current fluctuations based on unique observational and modeled data sets on the West Florida Shelf. The properties of the oscillations, including spatial and temporal characteristics, and mechanisms of generation and propagation will be discussed. This presentation is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation Ocean Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowship under Grant OCE-1421180 (E. V. Maksimova).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86006", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86007" } }
{"authors":"Xinzhao Chu::University of Colorado at Boulder--John Smith::University of Colorado at Boulder--Cao Chen::University of Colorado at Boulder--Jian Zhao::University of Colorado at Boulder--Zhibin Yu::University of Colorado at Boulder--Chester Gardner::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign - UIUC--", "title":"SA51C-2408: OASIS 1.0: Very Large-Aperture High-Power Lidar for Exploring Geospace", "abstract":"A new initiative, namely OASIS (the Observatory for Atmosphere Space Interaction Studies), has called for a very large-aperture high-power (VLAHP) lidar as its first step forward to acquire the unprecedented measurement capabilities for exploring the space-atmosphere interaction region (SAIR). Currently, there exists a serious observational gap of the Earth’s neutral atmosphere above 100 km. Information on neutral winds and temperatures and on the plasma-neutral coupling in the SAIR, especially between 100 and 200 km, is either sparse or nonexistent. Fully exploring the SAIR requires measurements of the neutral atmosphere to complement radar observations of the plasma. Lidar measurements of neutral winds, temperatures and species can enable these explorations. Many of these topics will be addressed with the VLAHP lidar. Discoveries of thermospheric neutral Fe, Na and K layers up to nearly 200 km at McMurdo, Antarctica and other locations on Earth, have opened a new door to observing the neutral thermosphere with ground-based instruments. These neutral metal layers provide the tracers for resonance Doppler lidars to directly measure the neutral temperatures and winds in the thermosphere, thus enabling the VLAHP lidar dream! Because the thermospheric densities of these metal atoms are many times smaller than the layer peak densities near 90 km, high power-aperture product lidars, like the VLAHP lidar, are required to derive scientifically useful measurements. Furthermore, several key technical challenges for VLAHP lidar have been largely resolved in the last a few years through the successful development of Fe and Na Doppler lidars at Boulder. By combining Rayleigh and Raman with resonance lidar techniques and strategically operating the VLAHP lidar next to incoherent scatter radar and other complementary instruments, the VLAHP lidar will enable new cutting-edge exploration of the geospace. These new concepts and progresses will be introduced in this paper.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86007", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86008" } }
{"authors":"Stephen Hall::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Gary Swenson::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--", "title":"SA13B-2372: Multi-Beam, High-Power Rayleigh Lidar for the Capture of 2D Dynamic Atmospheric Features", "abstract":"While single-beam Rayleigh lidar have been in common usage for decades, their lack of horizontal resolution limits their ability to study the dynamic structure of the atmosphere to what can be observed in a single vertical profile. An experimental multi-beam lidar transmitter at the University of Illinois overcomes this problem by the simultaneous generation of a fan of closely-spaced near-vertical beams from a single high-power pulsed laser, allowing for the resolution of horizontal features on the order of tens of meters and the capture of dynamic events such as billows and overturnings. This transmitter is coupled with a digital receiver that allows for quickly variable vertical resolution that can be dynamically varied to match the scale of observed features.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86008", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86009" } }
{"authors":"Justin Cox::Auburn University--Lorraine Wolf::Auburn University--", "title":"GP13B-1297: Evidence of Crustal Faulting and Deformation in the Muckleshoot Basin, Washington", "abstract":"The Muckleshoot basin of western Washington, sandwiched between the Seattle Uplift on the west and the Cascade Range on the east, is deforming under north-south shortening and clockwise rotation of the north Cascadia forearc. Accommodating the regional strain are crustal faults in the Puget Lowland that cluster around three azimuths: east-west, northwest-southeast, and north-northwest-south-southeast. Evidence for all three groups appears on the periphery of the Muckleshoot basin. In this study, we add gravity measurements to an existing database to better define the geometry of the Muckleshoot basin and its relation to previously mapped faults appearing on the basin margins. A northwest-trending gravity high bisects the basin into two sub-basins, a larger one to the south and a smaller one to the north. We suggest that the gravity high is associated with a deep basement structure and its orientation is consistent with northward-directed crustal shortening. Regional-residual separation methods and derivative maps show pronounced magnetic lineations that extend faults expressed along the basin margins to east-west trending faults that cross the Puget Sound. Three intersecting cross-sectional models produced for this study are consistent with the following hypotheses: (1) the northwest-trending White River and Green River faults mapped on the eastern basin margin appear as south-verging, steeply dipping reverse faults in the central basin; (2) the north-northwest trending Franklin fault, mapped previously as a strike-slip fault, projects into the basin and shows little vertical offset in the single profile it crosses, and (3) the northwest trajectory of both the White River and Green River faults appears to curve southward as the faults traverse the Muckleshoot basin, following east-west oriented gravity and magnetic anomalies that cross the Puget Sound. Results from the study suggest that the faults and folds in Muckleshoot basin are actively interacting with other faults in the Puget Lowland to accommodate regional strain in the overriding plate.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86009", "section":"Geomagnetism and Paleomagnetism"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86010" } }
{"authors":"Eugene Robinson::Brown University--Xi Yang::Brown University--Jung-Eun Lee::Brown University--", "title":"GC23B-1143: Ecosystem productivity and water stress in tropical East Africa: A Case Study of the 2010-11 drought", "abstract":"The characterization of changes in ecosystem productivity as a consequence of water stress and changing precipitation regimes is critical in defining the response of tropical ecosystems to water stress and projecting future land cover transitions in the East African tropics. Through the analysis of solar-induced chlorophyll fluorescence (SIF), soil moisture, rainfall and reanalysis data, this paper characterizes the 2010-11 drought in tropical East Africa. We demonstrated that SIF, a proxy of ecosystem productivity, varied with water availability during the 2010-11 drought. A comparison of the 2010-11 drought to previous regional droughts revealed that the consecutive failure of rainy seasons in fall 2010 and spring 2011 yielded a drought that is distinguished not only in intensity, but also in spatial and temporal extent as compared to an average of previous regional droughts: the 2010-11 event extended further east and with greater intensity in the southern hemisphere. Anomalously low SIF values during the 2010-11 drought are strongly correlated with those of soil moisture and precipitation. SIF also demonstrated a stronger temporal sensitivity to accumulated water deficit as compared to the conventional Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), which approximates photosynthetic potential (chlorophyll content and leaf mass), from the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS). Anomalously high rainfall during the dry seasons preceding failed rainy seasons suggest that the seasonality of East African rainfall may be transitioning from a regime characterized by biannual monsoons to one with increasing convective rainfall. Rising boundary layer height during the dry season further substantiates this conclusion by suggesting a transition towards increased deep convection during the summers. This work demonstrated the unique characteristics of the 2010-11 East African drought, and the ability of SIF to track the levels of water stress during the drought.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86010", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86011" } }
{"authors":"Caetano Fraga::UFRGS Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul--Josue Medellin-Azuara::University of California Davis--Guilherme Marques::Institute of Hydraulic Research UFGRS--Carlos Mendes::UFRGS Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul Institute of Hydraulic Research UFGRS--", "title":"H41G-1462: Optimization of urban water supply portfolios combining infrastructure capacity expansion and water use decisions", "abstract":"The expansion and operation of urban water supply systems under rapidly growing demands, hydrologic uncertainty, and scarce water supplies requires a strategic combination of various supply sources for added reliability, reduced costs and improved operational flexibility. The design and operation of such portfolio of water supply sources merits decisions of what and when to expand, and how much to use of each available sources accounting for interest rates, economies of scale and hydrologic variability. The present research provides a framework and an integrated methodology that optimizes the expansion of various water supply alternatives using dynamic programming and combining both short term and long term optimization of water use and simulation of water allocation. A case study in Bahia Do Rio Dos Sinos in Southern Brazil is presented. The framework couples an optimization model with quadratic programming model in GAMS with WEAP, a rain runoff simulation models that hosts the water supply infrastructure features and hydrologic conditions. Results allow (a) identification of trade offs between cost and reliability of different expansion paths and water use decisions and (b) evaluation of potential gains by reducing water system losses as a portfolio component. The latter is critical in several developing countries where water supply system losses are high and often neglected in favor of more system expansion. Results also highlight the potential of various water supply alternatives including, conservation, groundwater, and infrastructural enhancements over time. The framework proves its usefulness for planning its transferability to similarly urbanized systems.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86011", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86013" } }
{"authors":"Lei Tao::NEC Laboratories America--Da Pan::Princeton University--Ilya Gelfand::Michigan State University--Michael Abraha::Michigan State University--Richard Moyer::Albright College--Asia Poe::Michigan State University--Kang Sun::Princeton University--Philip Robertson::Michigan State University--Mark Zondlo::Princeton University--", "title":"B11B-0430: N2O fluxes over a corn field from an open-path, laser-based eddy covariance system and static chambers", "abstract":"Nitrous oxide (N2O) is important greenhouse and ozone-depleting gase. Although many efforts have been paid to N2O emissions, the spatial and temporal variability of N2O emissions still subject to large uncertainty. Application of the eddy covariance method for N2O emissions research would allow continuous ecosystem level flux measurements. The caveat, however, is need for high precision and high frequency measurements in field. In this study, an open-path, quantum cascade-laser-based eddy covariance N2O sensor has been deployed nearly continuously since May 2015 over a corn field at the W.K. Kellogg Biological Station site in SW Michigan. The field precision of the N2O sensor was assessed to be 0.1 ppbv at 10 Hz, and the total consumption was ~ 40 W, allowing the system to be powered solely by solar panels. The stability of the sensor under different temperature and humidity was tested within an environmental chamber. Spectroscopic experiments and cospectra analyses were carried out to study specific corrections associated with the sensor for eddy covariance techniques, including the line broadening effect due to water vapor and high frequency flux attenuation owning to sample path averaging. Ogive analyses indicated that the high-frequency N2O flux loss due to various damping effects was comparable to those of the CO2 flux. The detection limit of flux was estimated to be 0.3 ng N s-1 m-2 with a flux averaging interval of 30 minutes. The results from the EC system were also compared with ground measurements by standard static chambers (SC). Overall, more than 150 individual chamber measurements were taken within the footprint of the EC system. We found good correlation between the EC and SC methods given the spatiotemporal differences between the two techniques (R2 = 0.75). Both methods detected increased emissions during afternoon as compared to morning and night hours. Differences between EC and SC were also studied by investigating spatial variability with a footprint model. Our results indicate diurnality of ecosystem level N2O emissions may have important consequences for both field and global scale budgets and highlight the need of more continuous measurements for future investigation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86013", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86014" } }
{"authors":"Erika Wada::Nihon University--Takato Takemura::Nihon University--", "title":"MR41C-2654: Experimental study of Frictional property of siliceous shale from the viewpoint of clay mineral fabric", "abstract":"There exist slate cleavages in siliceous shale distributed in Tamba-belt located southwest Japan, belonging to Jurassic accretionary complexes, which is formed by a unique geological process. Tamba belt is classified into the complexes of the Type I and II Suites. It is well known that the siliceous shale mined from Type I Suite of Tamba belt is of high-quality as natural whetstone. In this study, we analyzed the relationship between the accretionary prism geology and topography of the study area in order to characterize the distribution of the siliceous shale. We measured illite crystallinity (IC) in order to consider the deformation process, metamorphic conditions, and clay mineral fabric. The value of IC and clay mineral fabric are deemed to be related to frictional properties.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86014", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86015" } }
{"authors":"Alvaro Salazar::University of Queensland--Joshua Larsen::University of Queensland--Clive Mcalpine::University of Queensland--Josef Syktus::--Jack Katzfey::CSIRO Ocean and Atmosphere Flagship--", "title":"H31A-1399: Land cover change drives climate extremes and aridity in non-Amazonian South America", "abstract":"Increasing evidence is showing the relevance of land cover change on the regional mean climate. However, the mechanisms that explain these interactions remain a challenge in land – atmosphere interactions science. This challenge is particularly significant in understanding the role of vegetation change on climate extremes and aridity, which has been barely addressed by the literature. In this paper we focus on this gap by investigating the effects of land use and land cover change on selected climate extremes indices and aridity in non-Amazonian South America over an area of about 3 million km2. We run a 3 ensemble climate model nudged with the ERA-Interim reanalysis and stretched to 25 km resolution for present (year 2005) land cover relative to realistic historic vegetation distribution. The most important results of this experiment are that the degree of change in vegetation structure determines whether extreme daytime temperatures will increase or decrease, particularly during the dry season. This is because a large change in surface roughness promotes increased wind speeds and heat advection, whereas a small change in surface roughness does not increase wind and can increase heat build-up in the atmosphere since the sensible heat flux also increases. We also put these results in a wider context of land surface – atmospheric feedbacks by looking at the corresponding change in aridity (precipitation / potential evapotranspiration). This shows the processes that drive the changes in temperature extremes also determine whether significant changes in aridity occur, since all the change in aridity can be prescribed to changes in potential evaporation, or atmospheric water demand. We propose a conceptual model of the mechanisms that explain these alterations which is an advance in understanding land-atmosphere interactions and provides evidence of the main mechanisms responsible of changes in the feedbacks because of changes in natural vegetation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86015", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86018" } }
{"authors":"Amanda Weber::Colorado State University--Steven Fassnacht::Colorado State University--", "title":"C33C-0839: The Spatial and Temporal Distribution of Melt Rates Across the Southern Rocky Mountains, USA", "abstract":"About 20% of the world’s population relies on melting snow for their main water supply. Many of these areas are mountainous and there is limited in situ monitoring of snow accumulation and melt due to few stations and the lack of representativeness of these stations in this complex terrain. Most of the existing stations only collect precipitation and temperature data, thus modeling of snowmelt often uses temperature as an index for the full energy balance needed to physically model melt. Across the Western United States (U.S.), there are currently about 700 snow telemetry (SNOTEL) stations that monitor precipitation and temperature, as well as snow water equivalent (SWE) and snow depth. Across the Southern Rocky Mountains in the central-western U.S., 90 SNOTEL stations have been operating since the late 1970s or mid-1980s. These stations were used to estimate the daily snowmelt rate as a function of the daily average air temperature, in millimeters of snow melt per day per degrees Celsius, over half-month periods to consider the seasonality of incoming solar radiation. The spatio-temporal variability of melt was then evaluated based on the location, topography, and canopy characteristics for each station. It is expected that this melt rate spatio-temporal variability can applied to other continental regions across the globe.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86018", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86019" } }
{"authors":"Yuan Tian::ITAG Institute of Theoretical and Applied Geophysics, Peking University--", "title":"3-D shear wave velocity structure beneath Northeastern China: An active craton margin", "abstract":"Northeast China (NEC, hereinafter) is a relatively complex block in Northeast Asia, which was formed in Paleozoic and Mesozoic eras due to the closing of Paleoasian Ocean (west) and the subduction of ancient Pacific plate (east). Unlike its neighbor North China Craton(NCC), NEC is not a typical craton but more like a craton margin which is more active and could probably tell us more about how a craton-like block is affected by subduction. It is a best place to study intra-continental volcanism: Mesozoic and Cenozoic volcanoes are widespread in the whole area, resulting in many famous volcanic zones: Changbai and Jingpohu in the east, Wudalianchi in the north, Arshan and Dalenuor in the west. Here we try to find the seismic evidence of where these volcanoes originated from and how they indicate the possible inner connection between the subduction of slabs and the evolution of NEC. We use dispersion curves respectively obtained from earthquake Two-Station Method (TSM)and Ambient Noise Tomography (ANT) to invert 3-D shear wave velocity structure beneath NEC. Unlike Helmhotz and Ekional tomography who requires evenly distributed station but can give estimates of uncertainty automatically, the TSM method could be done with uneven stations and more important, could obtain phase velocities of long periods and with less noise. We first get high - resolution tomographic figure of a wide range from 6s to 160s and give estimate of uncertainties of each period by bootstrap method. After obtaining high-resolution phase velocity maps, we invert for shear wave velocity using the Bayesian Monte-Carlo method of Shen et al., 2013, in which the Moho depth is constrained by receiver function results from Tao et al., 2014. Our results shows that the sources of the volcanoes are not the same: Changbai has the strongest and deepest source which may be directly supplied by a mid-lower mantle source; Arshan and Dalenuor have strong low velocity anomaly in upper mantle but vanish when going deeper; Wudalianchi has a shallowest source which only confines in crust and uppermost mantle and may come from low velocity zones in the east through preexisting faults.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86019", "section":""} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86021" } }
{"authors":"Marijke Unger::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Noah Besser::Parker Street--", "title":"PA21A-2158: Playing with Science: Using Interactive Games to Improve Public Engagement", "abstract":"The challenge of communicating science in an accurate, concise, and engaging way has never been more important. While much focus has been put on how scientific information gets delivered, perhaps less value has been put on what the public can communicate back to science. Imparting scientific knowledge to the public in one direction, however successfully done, could be called ` transmission.`  It's not until the public responds that you have ` communication,`  or maybe a better word would be ` conversation.`  The National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) has been working on a project for use in its educational visitor center that not only attempts to engage the public with concise, accurate scientific information, but also to help the public respond, in order to create a communicative circuit. Using an interactive game platform, visitors can immerse themselves in a voyage of scientific discovery by choosing a character and building a story line based on multiple selections, a version of a “build your own adventure” experience. We are exploring ways to capture data from these interactions in order to inform additional program development based on areas of greatest interest to the public. The game could thus be used to update existing exhibits so they better reflect those areas of interest, making them more relevant and engaging to visitors, and expanding opportunities for dialogue between science centers and members of the public.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86021", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86022" } }
{"authors":"Clara Chan::University of Delaware--Sean Mcallister::University of Delaware--Anna Leavitt::Bigelow Lab for Ocean Sciences--David Emerson::Bigelow Lab for Ocean Sciences--Brian Glazer::University of Hawaii at Manoa--", "title":"B13C-0633: Using Intact Iron Microbial Mats to Gain Insights Into Mat Ecology and Geochemical Niche at the Microbial Scale", "abstract":"Microbial mats are formed by microorganisms working in coordinated symbiosis, often benefitting the community by controlling the local geochemical or physical environment. Thus, the ecology of the mat depends on the individual roles of microbes organized into niches within a larger architecture. Chemolithotrophic Fe-oxidizing bacteria (FeOB) form distinctive Fe oxyhydroxide biominerals which constitute the building blocks of the mat. However, the majority of our progress has been in understanding the overall community structure. Understanding the physical mat structure on the microbial scale is important to unraveling FeOB evolution, the biogeochemistry and ecology of Fe-rich habitats, and ultimately interpreting FeOB biosignatures in the rock record. Mats in freshwater and marine environments contain strikingly similar biomineral morphologies, yet they are formed by phylogenetically distinct microorganisms. This suggests that the overall architecture and underlying genetics of freshwater and marine mats has evolved to serve particular roles specific to Fe oxidation. Thus, we conducted a comparative study of Fe seep freshwater mats and marine hydrothermal mats. We have developed a new approach to sampling Fe mats in order to preserve the delicate structure for analysis by confocal and scanning electron microscopy. Our analyses of these intact mats show that freshwater and marine mats are similarly initiated by a single type of structure-former. These ecosystem engineers form either a hollow sheath or a twisted stalk biomineral during mat formation, with a highly directional structure. These microbes appear to be the vanguard organisms that anchor the community within oxygen/Fe(II) gradients, further allowing for community succession in the mat interior as evidenced by other mineralized morphologies. Patterns in biomineral thickness and directionality were indicative of redox gradients and temporal changes in the geochemical environment. These observations show that the FeOB create the structure of the environment for the entire microbial community, acting as environmental engineers. Furthermore, they leave behind distinctive signatures of environmental conditions (e.g. presence of oxygen, hydrothermal pulsing), which can be recorded in the rock record.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86022", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86023" } }
{"authors":"Balaji Rajagopalan::University of Colorado at Boulder--Daniel Broman::University of Colorado at Boulder--Thomas Hopson::National Center for Atmospheric Research--", "title":"GC41B-1099: Scenario-neutral Food Security Risk Assessment: A livestock Heat Stress Case Study", "abstract":"Food security risk assessments can provide decision-makers with actionable information to identify critical system limitations, and alternatives to mitigate the impacts of future conditions. The majority of current risk assessments have been scenario-led and results are limited by the scenarios - selected future states of the world’s climate system and socioeconomic factors. A generic scenario-neutral framework for food security risk assessments is presented here that uses plausible states of the world without initially assigning likelihoods. Measures of system vulnerabilities are identified and system risk is assessed for these states. This framework has benefited greatly by research in the water and natural resource fields to adapt their planning to provide better risk assessments. To illustrate the utility of this framework we develop a case study using livestock heat stress risk within the pastoral system of West Africa. Heat stress can have a major impact not only on livestock owners, but on the greater food production system, decreasing livestock growth, milk production, and reproduction, and in severe cases, death. A heat stress index calculated from daily weather is used as a vulnerability measure and is computed from historic daily weather data at several locations in the study region. To generate plausible states, a stochastic weather generator is developed to generate synthetic weather sequences at each location, consistent with the seasonal climate. A spatial model of monthly and seasonal heat stress provide projections of current and future livestock heat stress measures across the study region, and can incorporate in seasonal climate and other external covariates. These models, when linked with empirical thresholds of heat stress risk for specific breeds offer decision-makers with actionable information for use in near-term warning systems as well as for future planning. Future assessment can indicate under which states livestock are at greatest risk of heat stress; when coupled with assessments of additional measures (e.g. water and fodder availability) can inform on alternatives that provide satisfactory performance under a wide range of states (e.g. optimal cattle breed, supplemental feed, increased water access).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86023", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86024" } }
{"authors":"Cameron Schwalbach::University of Cincinnati Main Campus--Carlton Brett::University of Cincinnati Main Campus--Christopher Aucoin::University of Cincinnati Main Campus--Benjamin Dattilo::Indiana University Purdue University Fort Wayne--", "title":"PP13C-2299: Carbonate facies changes in the Upper Ordovician (Late Katian) of the Cincinnati Arch region: Implications for paleoclimate", "abstract":"The Upper Ordovician Rowland Member (Drakes Formation) exposed in the Cincinnati Arch region displays a suite of unusual facies that appear to record an environmental transition during the Late Ordovician. The Rowland displays four well-defined lithofacies, each containing a distinct biofacies. Proximal facies consist of green to gray shaly lime mudstones (often dolomitized), with ripples and desiccation cracks; these facies are sparsely fossiliferous, but show an abundance of infaunal filter feeders indicated by glauconite-filled burrows. These facies pass downramp into pale medium-bedded argillaceous micritic limestones, which are also sparsely fossiliferous but locally contain abundant deposit feeding organisms including brachiopods, small bryozoans, mollusks, and non-calcified algae. Select horizons yield rugosan and large colonial corals. These micritic beds often interfinger with a series of thick skeletal grainstone lenses that represent tidally influenced high-energy shoals and are exceptionally rich in well-preserved gastropods. To the north, these grainstones pass abruptly into offshore gray shaly packstone facies more typical of the Cincinnatian and contain a higher diversity of epifaunal brachiopods and ramose bryozoans. Compared to upramp facies of older Cincinnatian cycles, those of the Rowland show a greater thickness, relatively more micrite and glauconite, and higher abundance of corals and gastropods. These changes appear to be associated with a strong transgression underlain by a regional (and possibly global) lowstand erosional surface, as well as the Waynesville carbon isotope excursion. Additionally, these facies are correlative with similar transgressive facies in other regions, which also overlie regional lowstand unconformities. Increased micrite production instead of skeletal carbonates and the abundance of herbivorous? gastropods rather than echinoderms and bryozoans may indicate large-scale eutrophication and algal production. Ecologically, these events may signify a change in overall taxonomic composition and replacement of incumbent taxa that post-dates the Richmondian invasion. Together, the lithologic and biologic facies patterns of the Rowland may be associated with a rapid rise in base level and the Boda global warming event.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86024", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86025" } }
{"authors":"Megan Kenworthy::Center for Ecohydraulics Research--Elowyn Yager::University of Idaho--Sarah Yarnell::University of California Davis--", "title":"EP21B-0893: Impact of hydrograph form on bedload transport processes in armored channels", "abstract":"Nearly all channels experience unsteady flows, from gradually varying snowmelt driven hydrographs to rapidly changing rain driven or regulated hydrographs. Despite this, the impacts of hydrograph form on bedload transport processes remain poorly understood. A set of flume experiments was conducted at the University of Idaho’s Stream Lab to investigate whether hydrograph form (rapid vs gradual changes in flow) alters transport rates and mobile grain sizes for a given discharge as well as armor persistence and total transport volume during a high flow event. Prior to experiments the flume was run to equilibrium with limited sediment feed to armor the bed. Experiments included four steady state runs and nine hydrograph runs that used five different hydrograph forms. The rate of change in flow between time-steps varied in the hydrographs but minimum and peak flows and total estimated transport capacity were held constant. Initial data analysis suggests that hydrograph form does indeed impact total transport volumes, transport rates, and transported grain sizes. More rapidly changing hydrographs transported a larger total volume of sediment and had greater transport rates at peak flow than hydrographs with slower rates of change. All hydrographs displayed counter-clockwise hysteresis in transport rates with the exception of the most gradually varying run. More rapidly changing hydrographs had coarser bedload material on the rising limb but finer bedload material on the falling limb compared the same flow in more gradually changing hydrographs. Many of these observations may be linked to more significant armor loss promoted by more rapid changes in flow. On the rising limb, rapid changes in flow may increase the unsteady component of shear stress to mobilize larger grains and greater volumes of sediment over short durations compared to the effects of gradual flow increases. This has the potential to destabilize the armor surface and further mobilize surface and subsurface material. Repeat photos and high speed video of the bed surface during experiments will be used to investigate this hypothesis and further work will identify and quantify significant relationships between hydrograph form and bedload transport processes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86025", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86026" } }
{"authors":"Gabriel Bowen::University of Utah--Hemmo Abels::Universiteit Utrecht--", "title":"PP22B-03: Environmental forcing of terrestrial carbon isotope excursion amplification across five Eocene hyperthermals", "abstract":"Abrupt changes in the isotope composition of exogenic carbon pools accompany many major episodes of global change in the geologic record. The global expression of this change in substrates that reflect multiple carbon pools provides important evidence that many events reflect persistent, global redistribution of carbon between reduced and oxidized stocks. As the diversity of records documenting any event grows, however, discrepancies in the expression of carbon isotope change among substrates are almost always revealed. These differences in magnitude, pace, and pattern of change can complicate interpretations of global carbon redistribution, but under ideal circumstances can also provide additional information on changes in specific environmental and biogeochemical systems that accompanied the global events. Here we evaluate possible environmental influences on new terrestrial records of the negative carbon isotope excursions (CIEs) associated with multiple hyperthermals of the Early Eocene, which show a common pattern of amplified carbon isotope change in terrestrial paleosol carbonate records relative to that recorded in marine substrates. Scaling relationships between climate and carbon-cycle proxies suggest that that the climatic (temperature) impact of each event scaled proportionally with the magnitude of its marine CIE, likely implying that all events involved release of reduced carbon with a similar isotopic composition. Amplification of the terrestrial CIEs, however, does not scale with event magnitude, being proportionally less for the first, largest event (the PETM). We conduct a sensitivity test of a coupled plant-soil carbon isotope model to identify conditions that could account for the observed CIE scaling. At least two possibilities consistent with independent lines of evidence emerge: first, varying effects of pCO2 change on photosynthetic carbon isotope discrimination under changing background pCO2, and second, contrasting changes in regional hydroclimate during the PETM and subsequent hyperthermals. These mechanisms have very different implications for the reconstruction of environmental conditions, and resolving the correct interpretation will require new, complimentary records of plant and soil conditions associated with the Early Eocene hyperthermals.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86026", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86027" } }
{"authors":"Kelsey Markey::Columbia University of New York--Cheryl Palm::Earth Institute, Columbia University--Stephen Wood::Earth Institute, Columbia University--", "title":"GC13H-1254: Assessing Nutritional Differences in Household Level Production and Consumption in African Villages", "abstract":"Studies of agriculture often focus on yields and calories, but overlook the production of diverse nutrients needed for human health. Nutritional production is particularly important in low-income countries, where foods produced correspond largely to those consumed. Through an analysis of crops, livestock, and animal products, this study aims to quantify the nutritional differences between household-level production and consumption in the Millennium Village at Bonsaaso, Ghana. By converting food items into their nutritional components it became clear that certain nutritional disparities existed between the two categories. In Bonsasso, 64-78% of households exhibited deficiencies in the consumption of Calcium, Fat, and/or Vitamin A despite less than 30% of households showing deficiencies on the production side. To better understand these differences, k-means clustering analysis was performed, placing households into groups characterized by nutritional means. By comparing the households in these groupings, it was clear that clusters formed around certain nutritional deficiencies. The socioeconomic characteristics of these groupings were then studied for correlations, concentrating on number of people at the household, sex and age of household head, and dependency ratio. It was found that clusters with high dependency ratios (the number of working persons in the household to non-working persons) exhibited a large variety of, and often drastic, nutritional deficiencies. In fact, the cluster with the highest average dependency ratio exhibited deficiencies in every nutrient. In light of these findings, regional policies may look to target households with a large number of dependents, and package nutrients for household distribution based on the characteristics of these clusters.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86027", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86028" } }
{"authors":"Ting Yang::Seismological Laboratory--Michael Gurnis::California Institute of Technology--", "title":"DI11A-2582: Large long wavelength dynamic topography with small amplitude free air anomaly", "abstract":"The amplitude of convection-induced long wavelength dynamic topography is uncertain. One advocacy of small amplitude dynamic topography invokes the observed small free air anomaly and GTR (free air gravity-topography ratio). We investigate this problem by inversing mantle structure constrained by long wavelength geoid, free air anomaly, gravity gradient and recently compiled high accuracy residual topography. Although geoid, free air anomaly and gravity gradient essentially include the same information, they are sensitive to mantle structure at different depth. Residual topography provides direct constraints on mantle convection. However, previous estimates of residual topography are usually with large uncertainty. We use recently compiled high accuracy point measurements of residual topography to constrain our inversion. We include lateral viscosity variation (temperature dependent viscosity, shallow viscosity heterogeneity, LVV) in our inversion since previous forward models suggests that LVV affects the surface gravitational and topography signals significantly. Our results indicate that considering LVV in the inversion does not change the misfit significantly, in contrary to previous forward models, suggesting (1) the over-fitting in previous 1D viscosity profile inversions or (2) temperature induced lateral viscosity variation are balanced by other effects at long wavelength features (2-8 degree). Although the inverted mantle structure is non-unique, all models predict larger than ~ 1.0 km amplitude long wavelength dynamic topography, consistent with the long wavelength components of the recent residual topography observations. Our analysis indicates that the relationship between free air gravity and topography depends on sphere harmonic degrees (wavelength). Thus the small amplitude free air gravity anomaly does not require small amplitude dynamic topography. We propose that despite GTR is quite helpful in deciphering the compensation depth of topography, it should not be used to estimate compensation depth based on global distributed observations on Earth.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86028", "section":"Earth's Deep Interior"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86029" } }
{"authors":"Omar Aleryani::Space Sciences Laboratory--Claire Raftery::Space Sciences Laboratory--Matthew Fillingim::University of California Berkeley--Alexander Fogle::Space Sciences Laboratory--Patrick Dunn::SFSU--James McFadden::University of California Berkeley--John Connerney::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Paul Mahaffy::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Robert Ergun::University of Colorado--Laila Andersson::University of Colorado at Boulder--", "title":"P21A-2048: Investigating the Martian Ionospheric Conductivity Using MAVEN Key Parameter Data", "abstract":"Since the Viking orbiters and landers in 1976, the Martian atmospheric composition has scarcely been investigated. New data from the Mars Atmosphere and Volatile EvolutioN (MAVEN) mission, launched in 2013, allows for a thorough study of the electrically conductive nature of the Martian ionosphere. Determinations of the electrical conductivity will be made using in-situ atmospheric and ionospheric measurements, rather than scientific models for the first time. The objective of this project is to calculate the conductivity of the Martian atmosphere, whenever possible, throughout the trajectory of the MAVEN spacecraft. MAVEN instrumentation used includes the Neutral Gas and Ion Mass Spectrometer (NGIMS) for neutral species density, the Suprathermal and Thermal Ion Compositions (STATIC) for ion composition, temperature and density, the Magnetometer (MAG) for the magnetic field strength and the Langmuir Probe and Waves (LPW) for electron temperature and density. MAVEN key parameter data are used for these calculations. We compare our results with previous, model-based estimates of the conductivity. These results will allow us to quantify the flow of atmospheric electric currents which can be analyzed further for a deeper understanding of the Martian ionospheric electrodynamics, bringing us closer to understanding the mystery of the loss of the Martian atmosphere.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86029", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86030" } }
{"authors":"Jose Agustin Brena-Naranjo::UNAM National Autonomous University of Mexico--Adrián Pedrozo-Acuña::UNAM National Autonomous University of Mexico--Roberto Real Rangel::UNAM National Autonomous University of Mexico--", "title":"H13C-1563: Doing hydrology backwards in tropical humid catchments", "abstract":"Top-down approaches in hydrology offer the possibility to predict water fluxes at the catchment scale based on the interpretation of the observed hydrological response at the catchment itself. Doing hydrology backwards (inferring precipitation and evapotranspiration rates at the catchment scale from streamflow measurements, see Kirchner (2009)) can be a useful methodology for estimating water fluxes at the catchment and regional scales. Previous studies using this inverse modeling approach have been performed in regions (UK, Switzerland, France, Eastern US) where energy-limited (in winter and early spring) and water-limited conditions (in summer) prevail during a large period of the year. However, such approach has not been tested in regions characterized by a quasi-constant supply of water and energy (e.g. humid tropics). The objective of this work is to infer annual rates of precipitation and evapotranspiration over the last decade in 10 catchments located in Mexico’s tropical humid regions. Hourly discharge measurements during recession periods were analyzed and parameters for the nonlinear storage-discharge relationship of each catchment were derived. Results showed large variability in both catchment-scale precipitation and evapotranspiration rates among the selected study sites. Finally, a comparison was done between such estimates and those obtained from remotely-sensed data (TRMM for precipitation and MOD16 for evapotranspiration).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86030", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86031" } }
{"authors":"Ann Bauer::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--Christopher Fisher::Washington State University--Jeffrey Vervoort::Washington State University--Samuel Bowring::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--", "title":"V43D-07: The Role of Accessory Phases in the Sm-Nd Isotope Systematics of the Acasta Gneiss Complex", "abstract":"The Acasta Gneiss Complex (AGC) of the Slave Craton in the Northwest Territories, Canada, contains some of Earth’s oldest continental crust. It is characterized by a range of compositionally diverse gneisses with crystallization ages of 3.3 to > 4.0 Ga1-5. The AGC has undergone a multistage history of metamorphism and deformation. Given these post-crystallization processes, the extent of Nd isotope heterogeneity suggested by published4-7 whole rock Sm-Nd analyses of these rocks has been called into question. Criticisms include the likelihood of mixed lithologies at the hand-sample scale and the potential for open-system behavior of the Sm-Nd isotopic system in these rocks. We obtained whole rock compositional, Sm-Nd and Lu-Hf isotope data paired with Hf in zircon and Nd in titanite and apatite data to further evaluate the isotope record, and use U-Pb and Lu-Hf of zircon as a basis for identifying mixed or complex samples. Preferential preservation of Lu-Hf over Sm-Nd isotope systematics in multiply deformed, complex rocks may be controlled by the minerals that dominate the Hf and Nd budgets, with the majority of the Hf effectively sheltered in zircon and the Nd largely hosted in accessory phases such as apatite and titanite. This composite dataset enables us to evaluate the possibility that Hf and Nd isotopic systematics have been decoupled in these samples that have such critical bearing on our understanding of early crust-forming processes. [1]Bowring and Williams (1999). CoMP, 134(1), 3-16. [2]Iizuka, T. et al. (2006) Geology, 34(4), 245-248. [3]Iizuka et al (2007). Precambrian Res, 153(3), 179-208. [4]Bowring et al. 1989. Nature, 340: 222-225. [5]Mojzsis et al. (2014). GCA, 133, 68–96. [6]Bowring and Housh (1995) Science 269, 1535–1540. [7]Moorbath et al (1997) Chem. Geol. 135, 213–231.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86031", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86032" } }
{"authors":"Yimin Liu::IAP Insititute of Atmospheric Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Bian He::IAP Insititute of Atmospheric Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Guo-Xiong Wu::Insititute of Atmospheric Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences--", "title":"GC21F-06: Location and variation of the summertime upper‑troposphere temperature maximum and South Asian High over South Asia", "abstract":"The upper-troposphere-temperature-maximum (UTTM) over South Asia is a pronounced feature in the Northern Hemisphere summer. Its formation mechanism is still unclear. This study shows that the latitude location of the upper-tropospheric warm- center (T) coincides with the subtropical anticyclone, and its longitude location is determined by the zonal distribution of vertical gradient of heating/cooling (QZ), which is different from the Gill’s model. Since both convective heating and radiation cooling decrease with height in the upper troposphere, the heating/cooling generates vertical northerly/southerly shear, leading to a warm/cold center being developed between heating profile in the east/west and cooling profile in the west/east. The location of the UTTM coincides with the South Asian High (SAH) and is between a radiation cooling in the west and the Asian-monsoon convection heating source in the east. The UTTM is sensitive to this convective heating: increased heating in the source region in a general circulation model causes intensification of both the SAH and UTTM, and imposing periodic convective heating there results in oscillations in the SAH, UTTM, and vertical motion to the west with the same period. Diagnoses of reanalysis indicate that such an inherent subtropical T-QZ relation is significant at interannual timescale. Numerical experiments demonstrate that the feedback of atmospheric circulation to rainfall anomalies is an important contributor to the regional climate anomaly pattern.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86032", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86033" } }
{"authors":"Kuniyoshi Takeuchi::ICHARM International Centre for Water Hazard And Risk Management--Maksym Gusyev::ICHARM International Centre for Water Hazard And Risk Management--Jun Magome::University of Yamanashi--Muhammad Masood::Bangladesh Water Development Board--", "title":"H51A-1355: Global Floods and Droughts Simulation to Support International Flood Initiative and International Drought Initiative of the UNESCO International Hydrological Program", "abstract":"One of the main achievements of the IHD/IHP programs is the promotion and enhancement of hydrological data exchange within the global water community. World Catalogue of Very Large Floods, World Water Balance and Water Resources of the Earth are the great examples of some initial collaborative efforts and the FRIEND and Catalogue of Rivers for Southeast Asia and the Pacific are the more recent outcomes. Along with similar efforts by WMO, FAO, IGBP, CEOS and many other national and international institutes, the global hydrological monitoring and nowcast have made a considerable progress last decade and are about to put into practice. Such efforts include global streamflow alert system of U Maryland and GFAS-streamflow of ICHARM and U Yamanshi. Especially the recent achievements of GFAS-streamflow support the current efforts of IHP International Flood Initiative (IFI) and International Drought Initiatives (IDI) by global nowcasts and easily visible indicators in 20-km resolution.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86033", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86034" } }
{"authors":"Tom Vanwalleghem::University of Cordoba--Andrea Román::University of Cordoba--Juan Giraldez::University of Cordoba--", "title":"EP33D-05: The relative importance of physical erosion and soil water dynamics on chemical weathering and soil formation: learning from field and model results", "abstract":"A new model is presented that integrates the effect of landscape evolution and soil formation. This model is based on a daily spatially-explicit soil water balance. Average soil water content, temperature and deep percolation fluxes are linked to weathering and soil formation processes. Model input (temperature and precipitation) for the last 25 000 years was generated on a daily time by combining palaeoclimate data and the WXGEN weather generator. The soil-landscape model was applied to a 48 km2 semi-natural catchment in Southern Spain, with soils developed on granite. Model-generated runoff was used for a first validation against discharge observations. Next, soil formation output was contrasted against experimental data from 10 soil profiles along two catenas. Field data showed an important variation in mobile regolith thickness, between 0,44 and 1,10m, and in chemical weathering along the catena. Southern slopes were characterized by shallower, stonier and carbon-poor soils, while soils on north-facing slopes were deeper, more fine-textured and had a higher carbon content. Chemical depletion fraction was found to vary between 0,41 and 0,72. The lowest overall weathering intensity was found on plateau positions. South facing slopes revealed slightly lower weathering compared to north facing slopes. We attribute this to higher runoff generation and physical erosion rates on north facing slopes, transporting weathered material downslope. Model results corroborate these findings and show continuously wet soils on north-facing slopes with more runoff generation and a steady deep percolation flux during the wet winter season. On south-facing slopes, infiltration is higher and percolation is more erratic over time. Soils on the footslopes then were shown to be significantly impacted by deposition of sediment through lateral erosion fluxes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86034", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86035" } }
{"authors":"Alexander Tardy::National Weather Service Silver Spring--Isabel Corcus::San Diego County Public Health--Kristen Guirguis::Scripps Institution of Oceanography--", "title":"PA13A-2164: National Weather Service, Emergency Medical Services, Scripps Institution of Oceanography/UCSD and California EPA Collaboration on Heat Health Impact and Public Notification for San Diego County", "abstract":"The National Weather Service (NWS) has issued official heat alerts in the form of either a heat advisory or excessive heat warning product to the public and core partners for many years. This information has traditionally been developed through the use of triggers for heat indices which combine humidity and temperature. The criteria typically used numeric thresholds and did not consider impact from a particular heat episode, nor did it factor seasonality or population acclimation. In 2013, the Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California, San Diego in collaboration with the Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment, of the California Environmental Protection Agency and the NWS completed a study of heat health impact in California, while the NWS San Diego office began modifying their criteria towards departure from climatological normal with much less dependence on humidity or heat index. The NWS changes were based on initial findings from the California Department of Public Health, EpiCenter California Injury Data Online system which documents heat health impacts. Results from the UCSD study were finalized and published in 2014; they supported the need for significant modification of the traditional criteria. In order to better understand the impacts of heat on community health, medical outcome data were provided by the County of San Diego Emergency Medical Services Branch, which is charged by the County’s Public Health Officer to monitor heat-related illness and injury daily from June through September. The data were combined with UCSD research to inform the modification of local NWS heat criteria and establish trigger points to pilot new procedures for the issuance of heat alerts. Finally, practices and procedures were customized for each of the county health departments in the NWS area of responsibility across extreme southwest California counties in collaboration with their Office of Emergency Services. The end result of the collaboration was to better define temperature thresholds relative to local climate, levels of heat related responses and activation, as well as to develop standardized terminology on public notifications. In 2014, the County of San Diego Office of Emergency Services incorporated heat alerts into the emergency push notification system for 2 significant heat waves.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86035", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86036" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"MR53A-03: En-Echelon Fracture Growth in Shales During Hydraulic Stimulation", "abstract":"The goal of a hydraulic fracture treatment program is to activate a discrete fracture network (DFN) that connects as much of the reservoir as possible and produces pathways for the extraction of hydrocarbons at the production well. The activated DFN usually grows outwards from the treatment well along the direction of the local maximum horizontal stress, SHmax. However, individual fractures in the DFN will have varying orientations that need not align with the overall azimuth or growth. The orientations of the individual fractures are determined by which pre-existing fractures generated from geological processes. The idealized cases of pure shear failures from long term deformation are likely oriented about 30 degrees from the direction of the maximum principal stress at the time of their activation and are not necessarily aligned with the current SHmax. Generally, pre-existing fracture sets do not align with SHmax ,and these multiple sets will be activated and grow in an en-echelon fashion to create a connected network that can move fluid away from the well. We use mechanisms from microseismic data, combined with a stress inversion, to constrain the fracture orientations associated with microseismic events. We examine a number of stages from the zipper-frac completion of half pad in the Horn River Basin, where generally two fracture sets are activated during the completion. However, we observe, potentially due to subtle rotations in the stresses throughout the completion, that different fractures are activated with space. This heterogeneity in orientation relative to SH­max is critical input for the geomechanical models on how treatment design programs influences the propagation of fluid and proppant into the reservoir.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86036", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86037" } }
{"authors":"Scott Bailey::Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University--Larry Gordley::GATS, Inc.--", "title":"A53A-0370: Solar Occultation Constellation for Retrieving Aerosols and Trace Element Species (SOCRATES): Proposed Mission Concept", "abstract":"The goal of SOCRATES is to resolve the critical but underexplored role of the upper troposphere/lower stratosphere (UTLS) in climate change. The mission would provide the suite of measurements required to quantify UTLS transport pathways and their contribution to UTLS composition, and to evaluate the radiative forcing implications of changes in UTLS composition forced by expected changes in these pathways as the climate evolves. The discrimination and quantification of UTLS transport pathways requires simultaneous measurement of several key trace gases and aerosols with high precision, accuracy, and vertical resolution. Furthermore, aerosols and clouds, often present in the UTLS, complicate the measurement of trace gases. The SOCRATES sensor is a 23-channel Gas Filter Correlation Radiometer (GFCR), referred to as GLO (GFCR Limb solar Occultation), with heritage from HALOE on UARS, and SOFIE on AIM. GLO measures aerosol extinction from 0.45 to 3.88 µm, important radiatively active gases in the UTLS (H2O, O3, CH4, N2O), key tracers of UTLS transport (HCN, CO, HDO), gases important in stratospheric O3 chemistry (HCl and HF), and temperature from cloud top to 50 km at a vertical resolution of < 1 km. Improved pointing knowledge will provide dramatically better retrieval precision in the UTLS, even in the presence of aerosols, than possible with HALOE. In addition, the GLO form factor is only of order 10% of that of HALOE, and costs for a constellation of GLO sensors is within the cost cap of a NASA Earth Venture mission. The SOCRATES mission concept is a 6-element constellation of autonomous small satellites, each mated with a GLO sensor, and deployed from a single launch vehicle. The SOCRATES/GLO approach reaps the advantages of solar occultation: high precision and accuracy; robust calibration; and high vertical resolution, while mitigating the sparse coverage of a single solar occultation sensor. We present the SOCRATES science case, and key elements of the SOCRATES mission and GLO instrument concepts.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86037", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86038" } }
{"authors":"Deb Jaisi::University of Delaware--Sunendra Joshi::University of Delaware--Ravi Kukkadapu::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--David Burdige::Old Dominion University--Donald Sparks::University of Delaware--", "title":"B51E-0476: REMINERALIZATION VS REDUCTIVE DISSOLUTION PATHWAY OF PHOSPHORUS CYCLING: A CASE STUDY IN THE CHESAPEAKE BAY", "abstract":"Coastal hypoxia have spread exponentially worldwide due to increased anthropogenic loading of nutrients in coastal waters. Hypoxia exerts an influence on the stability of minerals and organic debris, direction of nutrient flux at the sediment-water interface, and the extent of benthic-pelagic coupling. This study aimed to address fundamental questions related to sediment phosphorus (P) dynamics in response to transient bottom water hypoxia particularly on P effluxes at the sediment-water interface and P burial (as authigenic/vivianite P) under two pathways: remineralization of organic P (coupled C−P pathway) and reductive dissolution of ferric Fe-bound P (coupled Fe−P pathway). Authigenic phosphate isotope data suggest that the regeneration of inorganic P in the sediment from organic matter degradation (remineralization) is the predominant, if not sole, pathway for authigenic P precipitation in the sediments. Interestingly, ferric Fe-bound phosphate oxygen isotopes are heavier than equilibrium. This means that the ferric Fe-bound P pool in these sediments is largely composed of particulate P from terrestrial sources composed primarily of Fe phyllosilicates plus potentially vivianite that are largely resistant against dissolution in the anoxic sediment column. These results collectively support the predominance of coupled C−P pathway of P cycling, rather than Fe−P coupling, in hypoxic environment in the Chesapeake Bay.  ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86038", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86039" } }
{"authors":"James Ryan::University of Arizona--Rachel Black::Arizona Geological Survey--Rowena Davis::Arizona Geological Survey--Cindy Dick::Arizona Geological Survey--Tina Lee::Arizona Geological Survey--M Allison::Arizona Geological Survey--", "title":"IN23B-1728: EarthCubed: Community Convergence and Communication", "abstract":"What drives engagement across a diverse community with the common goal of creating a robust cyberinfrastructure for the geosciences? Which applications, social media venues and outreach mechanisms solicit the most valuable feedback? Of the dizzying toolkit available for community-building, which tools should receive time, attention and dedication? Finally, how does it all relate to better geoscience research? Research projects in the geosciences are rapidly becoming more interdisciplinary, requiring use of broader data-sets and a multitude of data-types in an effort to explain questions important to both the scientific community and the general public. Effective use of the data and tools available requires excellent community communication and engagement across disciplines, as well as a manner to easily obtain and access those data and tools. For over two years, the EarthCube project has sought to create the most active and engaged community possible, bringing together experts from all across the NSF GEO directorate and its many-faceted disciplines. Initial efforts focused on collecting insight and opinions at in-person “end-user workshops,” and informal organization of interest groups and teams. Today, efforts feature an organizational structure with dedicated internal communication and outreach groups. The EarthCube Office has been largely responsible for coordination of these groups and the social media and Internet presence of the project to date, through the creation and curation of the EarthCube.org website, social media channels, live-streaming of meetings, and newsletters. Measures of the effectiveness of these efforts will be presented, to serve as potential reference and guidance for other projects seeking to grow their own communities. In addition, we will discuss how the Office’s role in outreach and engagement has changed over the past year with the creation of the Engagement and Liaison Teams, and what it signifies for the Office’s role in EarthCube’s future.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86039", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86040" } }
{"authors":"Haolong Liu::IGSNRR Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research, CAS--", "title":"B21G-0555: Simulating spatiotemporal variation in full-flowering dates for tree peonies (1955-2011) in the middle and lower reaches of the Yellow River, China: using a panel data model", "abstract":"In China, the tree peony (Paeonia suffruticosa) is well known as the “king of flowers” since ancient times. The springtime flowering of it attracts a great number of tourists every year. Under the current background of rapid climate change, the flowering time of the tree peony has changed accordingly, which affected the travel arrangements of tourists. This paper is concerned with developing a panel data model to describe the relationship between full-flowering date (FFD) of the tree peony (Zhongyuan cultivar group) and relevant temperature change in the middle and lower reaches of the Yellow River. Then FFD time series at 24 sites in the period 1955–2011 were reconstructed using the above-mentioned model. At last, spatial and temporal variations in FFD were analysed. The results showed that the panel data model could simulate the FFDs of the tree peony accurately, with explained variance (R2)>0.65 and the root-mean-square error (RMSE)＜4.0 in the steps of double cross-validation. The simulated 57-year mean FFDs in the distribution area generally followed the latitudinal gradient. The FFDs in this area have advanced by 6 to 9 days over the past 57 years, at the rate of 0.8 to 1.8 days/decade. Compared with the other sub-areas in this area, the eastern forelands of Taihang Mountains and Luliang Mountains showed clearer advances of FFD. These conclusions reflected the comprehensive impact of climate change and the foehn on phenophases and are helpful for historical climate studies and festival events management", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86040", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86041" } }
{"authors":"Mauro Perego::Sandia National Laboratories--Irina Tezaur::Sandia National Laboratories--Stephen Price::Los Alamos National Laboratory--John Jakeman::Sandia National Laboratories--Mike Eldred::Sandia National Laboratories--Andy Salinger::Sandia National Laboratories--Matthew Hoffman::Los Alamos National Laboratory--", "title":"C53E-03: Towards quantifying uncertainty in Greenland's contribution to 21st century sea-level rise", "abstract":"We present recent work towards developing a methodology for quantifying uncertainty in Greenland’s 21st century contribution to sea-level rise. While we focus on uncertainties associated with the optimization and calibration of the basal sliding parameter field, the methodology is largely generic and could be applied to other (or multiple) sets of uncertain model parameter fields. The first step in the workflow is the solution of a large-scale, deterministic inverse problem, which minimizes the mismatch between observed and computed surface velocities by optimizing the two-dimensional coefficient field in a linear-friction sliding law. We then expand the deviation in this coefficient field from its estimated ` mean`  state using a reduced basis of Karhunen-Loeve Expansion (KLE) vectors. A Bayesian calibration is used to determine the optimal coefficient values for this expansion. The prior for the Bayesian calibration can be computed using the Hessian of the deterministic inversion or using an exponential covariance kernel. The posterior distribution is then obtained using Markov Chain Monte Carlo run on an emulator of the forward model. Finally, the uncertainty in the modeled sea-level rise is obtained by performing an ensemble of forward propagation runs. We present and discuss preliminary results obtained using a moderate-resolution model of the Greenland Ice sheet. As demonstrated in previous work, the primary difficulty in applying the complete workflow to realistic, high-resolution problems is that the effective dimension of the parameter space is very large.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86041", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86043" } }
{"authors":"George Duffy::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Stephen Nesbitt::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Greg McFarquhar::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--", "title":"A41N-03: Sensitivity of simulated snow cloud properties to mass-diameter parameterizations.", "abstract":"Mass to diameter (m-D) relationships are used in model parameterization schemes to represent ice cloud microphysics and in retrievals of bulk cloud properties from remote sensing instruments. One of the most common relationships, used in the current Global Precipitation Measurement retrieval algorithm for example, assigns the density of snow as a constant tenth of the density of ice (0.1g/m^3). This assumption stands in contrast to the results of derived m-D relationships of snow particles, which imply decreasing particle densities at larger sizes and result in particle masses orders of magnitude below the constant density relationship. In this study, forward simulations of bulk cloud properties (e.g., total water content, radar reflectivity and precipitation rate) derived from measured size distributions using several historical m-D relationships are presented. This expands upon previous studies that mainly focused on smaller ice particles because of the examination of precipitation-sized particles here. In situ and remote sensing data from the GPM Cold season Experiment (GCPEx) and Canadian CloudSAT/Calypso Validation Program (C3VP), both synoptic snowstorm field experiments in southern Ontario, Canada, are used to evaluate the forward simulations against total water content measured by the Nevzorov and Cloud Spectrometer and Impactor (CSI) probe, radar reflectivity measured by a C band ground based radar and a nadir pointing Ku/Ka dual frequency airborne radar, and precipitation rate measured by a 2D video disdrometer. There are differences between the bulk cloud properties derived using varying m-D relations, with constant density assumptions producing results differing substantially from the bulk measured quantities. The variability in bulk cloud properties derived using different m-D relations is compared against the natural variability in those parameters seen in the GCPEx and C3VP field experiments.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86043", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86044" } }
{"authors":"Gleb Panteleev::University of Alaska Fairbanks Tomsk Polytechnic University--Igor Semiletov::University of Alaska Fairbanks National Tomsk Research Polytech University, Russia--Natalia Shakhova::University of Alaska Fairbanks National Tomsk Research Polytech University, Russia--Oceana Francis::University of Hawaii--Max Yaremchuk::NRL--", "title":"C43A-0793: Variability of the circulation and off-shore transports in the Pacific sector of the Arctic Ocean", "abstract":"Climatological mean summer-fall circulations in the Pacific sector of the Arc- tic Ocean for the period of 1900-2006, for cyclonic (1989-1997) and anticyclonic (1997-2006) states of the local climate, and for the International Polar Year (IPY) period (2007-2009) were reconstructed through the use of modeling with 4Dvar data assimilation. Comparison of the mean climatological states with the IPY seasonal mean currents indicates significant changes in the circulation pattern. In particular, the off-shore transport from the shelves of the East- ern Siberian and Chukchi Seas has experienced a profound amplification with a strongest signatures in 2008 and 2009. This pehomenon may contribute to the process of accumulation of organic carbon in the central parts of the Arctic Ocean.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86044", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86045" } }
{"authors":"Joseph Kennedy::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Andrew Bennett::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Katherine Evans::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Patrick Worley::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Stephen Price::Los Alamos National Laboratory--Matthew Hoffman::Los Alamos National Laboratory--", "title":"C51C-0741: Building Confidence in the Community Ice Sheet Model (CISM) with LIVVkit, the Land Ice Validation and Verification Toolkit", "abstract":"Using an ice flow model to make inferences of real world systems requires a high level of confidence in the model. Verification and validation (V&V) is a set of techniques that are used to quantify confidence and build credibility. We are developing LIVVkit (Land Ice Verification and Validation toolkit), a comprehensive V&V toolkit for ice sheet models, to help scientists make robust inferences of real world systems with their models. LIVVkit is written in python, due to its wide usage throughout the scientific community and should be easily accessible to a large number of users. The toolkit provides resources for data assimilation, verification testing, validation testing, and performance evaluations. A website is created automatically which presents the testing results in a comprehensive and user-friendly way. LIVVkit allows scientists and developers to implement reusable validation tests of model applications and build confidence in their ice flow model. Currently, we are working with scientific users and developers of the Community Ice Sheet Model (CISM) for the development of LIVVkit, but LIVVkit is designed to be extensible to other ice flow models.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86045", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86046" } }
{"authors":"Debra Hausladen::Stanford University--Scott Fendorf::Stanford University--", "title":"B23E-0646: Surface Reactions Limiting Chromium(VI) Generation from Naturally Derived Chromium(III) Minerals", "abstract":"Chromium(III)-bearing minerals, commonly found in serpentinite and ultramaphic rocks, are ubiquitous in California soils and along convergent plate boundaries worldwide. Elevated concentrations of carcinogenic Cr(VI) have been measured in groundwater throughout the state, even in aquifers untouched by anthropogenic contamination. In most natural systems, manganese oxides are the only known, kinetically viable, oxidant of Cr(III). Numerous laboratory studies have demonstrated a finite capacity of Mn-oxides to generate Cr(VI) before surface alterations inhibit further Cr-oxidation. The extent to which these processes dictate the inhibition, and subsequent regeneration, of Mn-oxidation capacity within structured soils and sediments is not well understood. Here we use artificial soil aggregates made of Fe(III),Cr(III)-hydroxide-coated quartz sand and surrounded by aerated solute flow (pH 8, 30mM HEPES, 10mM HCO3-) to investigate C(VI) generation within ultramafic rock derived sediment and processes inhibiting manganese reactivity. We found that while Cr(VI)-production scaled with Cr-mineral solubility; Cr(VI) effluent concentrations from aggregates of both lower and higher solubility Cr(III)-minerals peaked very soon after reaction with birnessite (within 2 days and 4 days, respectively). Once Cr(VI) production plateaued (t=22 days) aggregate influent was acidified (pH 5, 30mM C2H3O2-). Despite increasing Cr(III) solubility at lower pH, aqueous Cr(VI) production further decreased. A secondary pulse of Cr(VI) generation was seen only after the surrounding solute returned to initial conditions (pH 8). As with the initial pulse, Cr(VI) concentration scaled with mineral solubility. Collectively, our results demonstrate the extent that natural fluctuations in groundwater composition, both as a result of irrigation or precipitation events, have the potential to both regenerate and inhibit Mn-oxide surfaces. These synthetic soil aggregates provide insight into how fluctuating hydrologic and redox conditions can impact Cr and Mn cycling within structured soils.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86046", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86047" } }
{"authors":"Sam Jameson::California State University Bakersfield--", "title":"GC41E-1124: Potential for Carbon Dioxide Sequestration and Enhanced Oil Recovery in the Vedder Formation, Greeley Field, San Joaquin Valley, California.", "abstract":"Most scientists agree that greenhouse gases (GHG) such as carbon dioxide (CO2), Methane (CH4), and nitrous oxide (N2O) are major contributors to the global warming trend and climate change. One effort to mitigate anthropogenic sourced CO2 is through carbon capture and sequestration. Depleted oil and gas reservoirs due to their known trapping capability, in-place infrastructure, and proximity to carbon emission sources are good candidates for possible CO2 storage. The Vedder formation is one of three reservoirs identified in the San Joaquin Basin that meets standards for possible storage. An analysis of net fluid production data (produced minus injected) from discovery to the present is used to determine the reservoir volume available for CO2 storage. Data regarding reservoir pressure response to injection and production of fluids include final shut-in pressures from drill stem test, static bottom-hole pressure measurements from well completion histories, and idle well fluid level measurements for recent pressure data. Proprietary experimental pressure, volume and temperature data (PVT), gas oil ratios (GOR), well by well permeability, porosity, and oil gravity, and relative permeability and perforation intervals are used to create static and dynamic multiphase fluid flow models. All data collected was logged and entered into excel spreadsheets and mapping software to create subsurface structure, reservoir thickness and pressure maps, cross sections, production/injection charts on a well-by-well basis, and both static and dynamic flow models. This data is used to determine storage capacity and the amount of pressure variance within the field to determine how the reservoir will react to CO2 injection and to gain insight into the subsurface fluid movement of CO2. Results indicate a homogenous field with a storage capacity of approximately 26 Million Metric Tons of CO2. Analysis of production by stream and pressure change through time indicates a strong water drive. The connection to a large and active aquifer allows pressure changes to be spread over large areas. Flow modeling will help to determine the impact that the water influx will have on storage capacity and EOR production potential.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86047", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86048" } }
{"authors":"Matthew Klawonn::Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute--Eli Dow::IBM Yorktown Heights--", "title":"IN51A-1797: Introducing MERGANSER: A Flexible Framework for Ecological Niche Modeling", "abstract":"Ecological Niche Modeling (ENM) is a collection of techniques to find a ”fundamental niche”, the range of environmental conditions suitable for a species’ survival in the absence of inter-species interactions, given a set of environmental parameters. Traditional approaches to ENM face a number of obstacles including limited data accessibility, data management problems, computational costs, interface usability, and model validation. The MERGANSER system, which stands for Modeling Ecological Residency Given A Normalized Set of Environmental Records, addresses these issues through powerful data persistence and flexible data access, coupled with a clear presentation of results and fine-tuned control over model parameters. MERGANSER leverages data measuring 72 weather related phenomena, land cover, soil type, population, species occurrence, general species information, and elevation, totaling over 1.5 TB of data. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, MERGANSER uses higher-resolution spatial data sets than previously published models. Since MERGANSER stores data in an instance of Apache SOLR, layers generated in support of niche models are accessible to users via simplified Apache Lucene queries. This is made even simpler via an HTTP front end that generates Lucene queries automatically. Specifically, a user need only enter the name of a place and a species to run a model. Using this approach to synthesizing model layers, the MERGANSER system has successfully reproduced previously published niche model results with a simplified user experience. Input layers for the model are generated dynamically using OpenStreetMap and SOLR’s spatial search functionality. Models are then run using either user-specified or automatically determined parameters after normalizing them into a common grid. Finally, results are visualized in the web interface, which allows for quick validation. Model results and all surrounding metadata are also accessible to the user for further study.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86048", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86049" } }
{"authors":"Sujeong Lim::KIAPS Korea Insititute of Atmospheric Prediction Systems--Kyung-Hee Seol::KIAPS Korea Insititute of Atmospheric Prediction Systems--", "title":"A51P-0339: Verification of tropical cyclone using the KIAPS Integration Model (KIM)", "abstract":"The Korea Institute of Atmospheric Prediction Systems (KIAPS) is a government funded non-profit research and development institute located in Seoul, South Korea. KIAPS is developing the Global Model, a backbone for the next-generation operational global numerical weather prediction (NWP) system with three-phase plans; Establishment and R&D Planning (2011-2013), Test Model Development (2014-2016), and Operational Model Development (2017-2019). As a second-phase, we have beta version of KIAPS Integration Model (KIM) that can produce reasonable global forecasting. Using the KIM model, we are evaluating the tropical cyclone forecast in the global model. To objectively provide a best estimate of the storm’s central position, we use the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) vortex tracker, widely used in tracker algorithms. It gives the track and intensity of the storm throughout the duration of the forecast based on its algorithm. As a verification tool, we use the Model Evaluation Tool – Tropical Cyclone (MET-TC), which produces statistical evaluation. We expect these results give the statue of ability for the tropical cyclone forecast with KIM model.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86049", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86050" } }
{"authors":"Gengpei Lin::National Central University--Wu-Lung Chang::National Central University--Chung-Pai Chang::Center for Space and Remote Sensing Research, National Central University--", "title":"G21A-1015: FEM Modeling of Lithospheric Rheology of Taiwan from GPS and PSInSAR Observations of Postseismic Deformation of the 1999 Chi-Chi Earthquake", "abstract":"Postseismic deformation following large earthquakes can persist from years to decades. Since the 1999 Chi-Chi earthquake (Mw=7.6), more than a decade of GPS records reveal postseismic deformation across Taiwan and have been used for afterslip and lithospheric rheology studies. Previous researches show that this earthquake has experienced rapid afterslip on deeper part of Chelungpu fault with slip rates decreased within years [Hsu et al., 2002 and 2007]. Other postseismic deformation signals were modeled by assumed Maxwell viscoelastic relaxation with heterogeneous lower crust and upper mantle [Rousset et al., 2012; Tang et al., 2015], which suggest that the pattern of vertical displacements is more sensitive to the geometry of heterogeneous viscoelastic lithospheric structure. To improve the spatial coverage of observation, this study processed both ERS and Envisat SAR images from 1999-2008 with PSInSAR techniques, and the result provide a better illustration of Line-Of-Sight (LOS) deformation field which is near to vertical. Both GPS and PSInSAR results reveal that the surface displacement rates (horizontal or vertical?) of eastern Taiwan are higher than interseismic rates after a decade, and this feature may reveal the importance of low viscosity zone beneath central range of Taiwan. With the benefits from GPS and PSInSAR data, we intend to test other posssible viscosity and the geometry of viscoelastic structure. We adopt coseismic fault geometry and slip distribution of the Chi-Chi earthquake based on previous studies, and build a set of 2D rheological models with an elastic upper-crust layer overlain a viscoelastic lower-crust layer and a viscoelastic upper mantle. The depths of the two layer boundaries are determined according to subsurface tectonic and velocity structures inferred by previous literatures. We employ the finite element method (FEM), Pylith, to estimate the postseismic surface deformation corresponding to different viscosities. Benefit from the flexibility of FEM mesh building, we are able to model surface viscoelastic deformation corresponding to different geometry of viscoelastic structures, and the results are compared with our geodetic measurements for determining the best-fit rheological model.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86050", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86051" } }
{"authors":"Rafael Almeida::Earth Observatory of Singapore--Anna Foster::Earth Observatory of Singapore--Judith Hubbard::Nanyang Technological University--Lee Liberty::Boise State Univ--Soma Sapkota::National Seismological Centre--", "title":"T21C-2843: Fault Geometry and Kinematics of the Main Frontal Thrust in Central Nepal Constrained With Active Source Seismic Data", "abstract":"The foreland thrust belt of the Himalayan orogen has been active since at least 2 Ma, deforming the Siwaliks Group, a 5-6 km thick section of continental Miocene-Pliocene strata. This terrane is bounded by the Main Boundary Thrust to the north and by the Main Frontal Thrust (MFT) to the south. For a long time, the MFT was long considered a blind system; only recently have surface exposures been identified, tied to large historical earthquakes. In many maps, the MFT is drawn as a single, continuous fault. However, it is actually composed of many fault segments, with overlaps and steps, whose timing and structural linkage are poorly constrained. This complex fault system represents the frontal portion of the large, active megathrust that is accommodating the India-Eurasia collision. We present some of the first seismic reflection profiles ever acquired across these thrusts. These profiles were acquired with a 7 ton Vibroseis source and a 264 channel seismic recording system over three field seasons in 2014 and 2015. As part of our study, we acquired 12 serial 2D profiles totalling ~70 km across a right-step of the fault system, where both fault segments have been identified as having slipped in the1934 Mw8.4 Nepal-Bihar earthquake. Our data image to a depth of 2-2.5 km and constrain the geometries and kinematics of these overlapping faults, with associated folding. Our data show that the faults are listric, that they overlap for over 10 (?) km along strike and produce short wavelength (~1 km) fault-propagation folds and longer wavelength fault-bend folds. Fault slip in this area has led to the progressive uplift and abandonment of strath terraces. Our new data will allow us to constrain the dips and kinematics of the different fault segments in order to convert uplift rates into slip rates on the fault segments, to more accurately assess the rate of shortening on the MFT in central Nepal.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86051", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86052" } }
{"authors":"Patrick Obrien::US Army Corps of Engineers--Kathleen White::US Army Corps of Engineers,--Douglas Friedman::Booz Allen Hamilton DC--", "title":"H33I-1734: Method for Assessing Impacts of Global Sea Level Rise on Navigation Gate Operations", "abstract":"Coastal navigation infrastructure may be highly vulnerable to changing climate, including increasing sea levels and altered frequency and intensity of coastal storms. Future gate operations impacted by global sea level rise will pose unique challenges, especially for structures 50 years and older. Our approach is to estimate future changes in gate operational frequency based on a bootstrapping method to forecast future water levels. A case study will be presented to determine future changes in frequency of operations over the next 100 years. A statistical model in the R programming language was developed to apply future sea level rise projections using the three sea level rise scenarios prescribed by USACE Engineer Regulation ER 1100-2-8162 . Information derived from the case study will help forecast changes in operational costs caused by increased gate operations and inform timing of decisions on adaptation measures.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86052", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86053" } }
{"authors":"Katrina Bennett::Los Alamos National Laboratory--Richard Middleton::Los Alamos National Laboratory--Nathan McDowell::Los Alamos National Laboratory--Chonggang Xu::Los Alamos National Laboratory--Cathy Wilson::Los Alamos National Laboratory--", "title":"H24B-05: Influence of Forest Disturbance on Hydrologic Extremes in the Colorado River Basin", "abstract":"The Colorado River is one of the most important freshwater rivers in the United States: it provides water supply to more than 30 million people, irrigation to 5.7 million acres of cropland, and produces over 8 billion kilowatt hours of hydroelectric power each year. Our study focuses on changes to hydrological extremes and threshold responses across the Colorado River basin due to forest fires, infestations, and stress-induced tree mortality using a scenario-based approach to estimate forest cover disturbance. Scenarios include static vegetation reductions and dynamic reductions in forest compositions based on three CMIP5 global climate models and one emission scenario (1950-2099). For headwater systems, large intra-year variability exists, indicating the influence of climate on these snowmelt driven basins. Strong seasonality in flow responses are also noted; in the Piedra River higher runoff occurs during freshet under a no-forest condition, with the greatest changes observed for maximum streamflow. Conversely, during the recessional period, flows are lower in scenarios with reduced forest compositions. Low-flows appear to be affected in some basins but not others; for example small headwater systems demonstrate higher low-flows with increased disturbance. Global Climate Model scenarios indicate a range of responses in these basins, characterized by lower peak streamflow but with higher winter flows. This response is influenced by shifts in water, and energy balances associated with a combined response of changing climate and forest cover compositions. Results also clearly show how changes in extreme events are forced by shifts in major water balance parameters (runoff, evapotranspiration, snow water equivalent, and soil moisture) from headwater basins spanning a range of hydrological regimes and ecological environments across the Colorado.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86053", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86055" } }
{"authors":"Omid Arabnia::San Francisco State University--Leonard Sklar::San Francisco State University--Gionata Bianchi::San Francisco State University--Molly Mclaughlin::San Francisco State University--", "title":"EP53B-1031: Can Wet Rocky Granular Flows Become Debris Flows Due to Fine Sediment Production by Abrasion?", "abstract":"Debris flows are rapid mass movements in which elevated pore pressures are sustained by a viscous fluid matrix with high concentrations of fine sediments. Debris flows may form from coarse-grained wet granular flows as fine sediments are entrained from hillslope and channel material. Here we investigate whether abrasion of the rocks within a granular flow can produce sufficient fine sediments to create debris flows. To test this hypothesis experimentally, we used a set of 4 rotating drums ranging from 0.2 to 4.0 m diameter. Each drum has vanes along the boundary ensure shearing within the flow. Shear rate was varied by changing drum rotational velocity to maintain a constant Froude Number across drums. Initial runs used angular clasts of granodiorite with a tensile strength of 7.6 MPa, with well-sorted coarse particle size distributions linearly scaled with drum radius. The fluid was initially clear water, which rapidly acquired fine-grained wear products. After each 250 m tangential distance, we measured the particle size distributions, and then returned all water and sediment to the drums for subsequent runs. We calculate particle wear rates using statistics of size and mass distributions, and by fitting the Sternberg equation to the rate of mass loss from the size fraction > 2mm. Abundant fine sediments were produced in the experiments, but very little change in the median grain size was detected. This appears to be due to clast rounding, as evidenced by a decrease in the number of stable equilibrium resting points. We find that the growth in the fine sediment concentration in the fluid scales with unit drum power. This relationship can be used to estimate fine sediment production rates in the field. We explore this approach at Inyo Creek, a steep catchment in the Sierra Nevada, California. There, a significant debris flow occurred in July 2013, which originated as a coarse-grained wet granular flow. We use surveys to estimate flow depth and velocity where super-elevation occurred, to calculate a unit power of 4.5 KW/m2. From this we predict that 14% of the coarse mass is converted to fine sediment by abrasion per km. At that rate, the increase in fines concentration may have been sufficient to cause a wet granular flow to evolve into a debris flow within the first 1 km of its > 4km travel distance.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86055", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86056" } }
{"authors":"Neil Patel::University of Massachusetts Amherst--Robert Deconto::University of Massachusetts Amherst--Alan Condron::University of Massachusetts Amherst--", "title":"PP21B-2240: Agulhas Leakage changes in the Pliocene as a modulator of AMOC strength", "abstract":"The leakage of Agulhas Current water into the South Atlantic is now thought to be a major player in global climate change. Its volume is linked to the strength and position of southern westerlies. Past changes in the westerly winds over the southern ocean have been noted on glacial-interglacial timescales, in response to both Northern Hemispheric conditions and changes in Antarctic ice volume. The Pliocene to Pleistocene transition, associated cooling and Northern Hemisphere glaciation may have related to changes in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, affecting both the position and strength of southern westerly winds. A northward shift in the westerlies, observed in past records of glaciation events, is thought to restrict the flow of warm, salty water from the Indian Ocean into the Atlantic, potentially impacting the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) and North Atlantic SSTs. A weakening of the Agulhas Leakage therefore could transmit changes in the southern hemisphere to the northern hemisphere. Much of the Agulhas leakage is carried in small eddies rotating off the main flow south of Cape Horn. High ocean model resolution (< 1/2°) is therefore required to realistically simulate the leakage's response to the overlying wind field. Here we run a series of global high-resolution ocean model (1/6°) experiments using the MITgcm to test the effect of a shift in the southern hemisphere westerlies on the Agulhas Leakage, during a past climate (Pliocene) warmer than today. A prescribed perturbation of the winds near South Africa shows a significant increase in Agulhas eddies into the Atlantic. Following this, we have performed longer simulations (> 25 model years) on the simulated Pliocene Ocean reflecting past shifts in the wind field quantify changes in Agulhas Leakage transport and salinity anomalies into the South Atlantic. We then investigate whether there is any corresponding change in North Atlantic Deep Water formation and the overall response of the AMOC from the Agulhas Leakage changes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86056", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86057" } }
{"authors":"Lesley Patrick::CUNY Brooklyn College--", "title":"PA41A-2164: Quantitative Index of Physical and Social Vulnerability to Current and Projected Coastal Storm Surge Flooding in New York City", "abstract":"Sea-level rise throughout the 21st century will result in increased flood exposure as current flood levels are achieved more frequently and new flood levels result in more widespread inundation. To increase the resiliency of coastal communities and allow populations to respond and recover to these hazards, it is important to develop a place-based understanding of how storm surge exposure, impacts, and community vulnerability will change over time. This work uses a GIS-based methodology to develop and map a quantitative index of physical and social vulnerability for New York City populations within existing and predicted flood zones to assess overall risk at the intersection of exposure and vulnerability. This index may be used to inform decision makers about the heterogeneous landscape of community-level vulnerability in New York City. Both the physical and socio-economic impacts of flooding events are often unevenly distributed, with socially vulnerable groups most likely to experience a disproportionate share of the detrimental effects. When both physical and socio-economic vulnerability are present in combination, the risk to populations is exacerbated. The combination of social vulnerability, critical infrastructure at risk, and exposure to hazard provides a metric to rank neighborhood risk to flood hazards through a quantitative vulnerability index that characterizes site-specific levels of risk to flood hazard. Results show that a range of mitigation and hazard preparation strategies, and a variety of response and recovery assistance measures are required to address the diversity of local-level flood risks. For some locations the greatest threat is the physical exposure to floodwaters while in other areas social vulnerability compromises the ability of the community to recover from even low exposure flood events. In many locations several elements of vulnerability overlap to create a heightened overall risk to flood events. These areas may require more intensive or specialized planning to protect people and infrastructure from flood impacts.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86057", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86058" } }
{"authors":"Jesse Dickinson::USGS Arizona Water Science Center--Robert Dudley::USGS--Glenn Hodgkins::US Geological Survey--Gregory McCabe::--", "title":"H41A-1285: Atmospheric effects on variability and seasonality of groundwater levels in the Eastern U.S.", "abstract":"Natural variations in water resources are often thought of as reflecting seasonal and interannual forcings in atmospheric water fluxes. Such variations are readily observed in streamflows in response to precipitation and lags due to basin water storage. These forcings also result in time-varying infiltration into the subsurface and variable aquifer recharge. Low-pass filtering in the subsurface, which can retain seasonal and interannual variability in hydrologic inputs but remove high-frequency variability, can modify responses of groundwater systems to precipitation forcings. Because of the filtering, we hypothesize that groundwater relations to seasonal and interannual precipitation forcing may possibly have greater statistical significance than relations between streamflow and precipitation. To quantify the relations, we correlate monthly time series of groundwater and streamflow in the eastern United States (US) to precipitation and climate indices. We focus on interannual differences in seasonal groundwater level highs and lows in wells to evaluate how precipitation affects groundwater extreme conditions in any year. To quantify differences in climatic and hydrogeologic settings, we correlate the spatial and temporal patterns from empirical orthogonal function analysis of the seasonal groundwater anomalies to precipitation and climate indices. Results indicate a north-south gradient in significant relations (95% confidence) between seasonal high anomalies to the El Nino/Southern Oscillation as indicated by the Multivariate ENSO Index (MEI), with stronger relations in the southern and northern parts of the eastern US. Preliminary results indicate that relations between groundwater and MEI are more significant than previously thought. Additional analysis will examine, through statistical analysis and modeling, if the low-pass filtering of high-frequency variability of hydrologic inputs in the subsurface allows for clearer teleconnection between groundwater and climatic modes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86058", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86059" } }
{"authors":"Mandy Schindler::Colorado School of Mines--Manika Prasad::Colorado School of Mines--Michael Batzle::Colorado School of Mines--", "title":"B13B-0602: Micro X-ray Computed Tomography Imaging and Ultrasonic Velocity Measurements of Hydrate-Bearing Porous Media", "abstract":"Naturally occurring gas hydrates contain signi cant amounts of natural gas which might be produced in the foreseeable future. Thus, it is necessary to understand the pore-space characteristics of hydrate reservoirs, especially the pore-scale distribution of hydrate and its interaction with the sediment. The goal of our research is to examine the distribution of hydrate in the pore space and the influence of hydrate pore-scale distribution on seismic velocities and sonic logs. We conducted laboratory measurements to obtain information about the distribution of hydrate in the pore space of synthetic porous media (glass beads). We used Tetrahydrofuran (THF) as a guest molecule since THF hydrate is a proxy for naturally occuring hydrate. We used micro X-ray computed tomography (MXCT) to image hydrate distribution in the pore space. In addition, we investigated the influence of hydrate saturation and distribution on ultrasonic velocities simultaneously with the MXCT imaging. We installed a torlon vessel and a cooling system in the MXCT scanner which allows us to form hydrate in the MXCT scanner at atmospheric pressure and a temperature of approximately 2°C. Both, MXCT images and ultrasonic velocity measurements, indicate that THF hydrate forms in the pore space while residual brine coats the grain surfaces and fills small pores. Our observations are in accordance with the pore-filling model of the effective medium theory of hydrate-bearing sediments. Based on this knowledge, it may be possible to calibrate seismic and well logging data to calculate the amount of natural gas stored in a hydrate reservoir. This information will help to make decisions regarding the producibility of methane hydrates and to develop safe production schemes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86059", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86060" } }
{"authors":"James Super::Yale University--Hui Li::Yale University--Mark Pagani::Yale University--Karen Chin::University of Colorado at Boulder--", "title":"PP33C-2316: Proxy Constraints on a Warm, Fresh Late Cretaceous Arctic Ocean", "abstract":"The warm Late Cretaceous is thought to have been characterized by open Arctic Ocean temperatures upwards of 15°C (Jenkyns et al., 2004). The high temperatures and low equator-to-pole temperature gradient have proven difficult to reproduce in paleoclimate models, with the role of the atmospheric hydrologic cycle in heat transport being particularly uncertain. Here, sediments, coprolites and fish teeth of Santonian-Campanian age from two high-latitude mixed terrestrial and marine sections on Devon Island in the Canadian High Arctic (Chin et al., 2008) were analyzed using a suite of organic and inorganic proxies to evaluate the temperature and salinity of Arctic seawater. Surface temperature estimates were derived from TEX86 estimates of near-shore, shallow (~100 meters depth) marine sediments (Witkowski et al., 2011) and MBT-CBT estimates from terrestrial intervals and both suggest mean annual temperatures of ~20°C, consistent with previous estimates considering the more southerly location of Devon Island. The oxygen isotope composition of non-diagenetic phosphate from vertebrate coprolites and bony fish teeth were then measured, giving values ranging from +13‰ to +19‰. Assuming the TEX86 temperatures are valid and using the temperature calibration of Puceat 2010, the δ18O values of coprolites imply Arctic Ocean seawater δ18O values between -4‰ and -10‰, implying very fresh conditions. Lastly, the δD of precipitation will be estimated from the hydrogen isotope composition of higher plant leaf waxes (C-25, C-27, C-29 and C-31 n-alkanes) from both terrestrial and marine intervals. Data are used to model the salinity of seawater and the meteoric relationship between δD and δ18O, thereby helping to evaluate the northern high-latitude meteoric water line of the Late Cretaceous.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86060", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86061" } }
{"authors":"Teresa Campos::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Meghan Stell::National Center for Atmospheric Research--", "title":"A21A-0026: Regional differences in major carbon emissions observed during FRAPPE (Front Range Air Pollution Photochemical Experiment) and WINTER (Wintertime Investigation of Transport, Emissions, and Reactivity) experiments", "abstract":"Sampling of coal powered power plant emission plumes during two NCAR airborne field campaigns using the NSF NCAR C-130, FRAPPE (Front Range Air Pollution Photochemical Experiment) and WINTER (Wintertime Investigation of Transport, Emissions, and Reactivity) revealed different plume composition in different areas of the continental United States. The FRAPPE campaign sampled along the Colorado Front Range and the WINTER campaign, based out of Virginia sampled along the East Coast. Analysis of the relative production of the three major carbon species, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, and methane from power plant plumes sampled in both these campaigns will be compared to the emissions reported to the EPA by the power plants. Regional differences will be highlighted. Spatial distribution of the pollution plume will also be presented, looking at factors such as topographic barriers, and meteorological phenomena such as subsidence and wind advection. This analysis will take into account experimental condition differences such as the summer versus winter sampling and night/day. ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86061", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86062" } }
{"authors":"Yiwei Cheng::Lawrence Berkeley National Lab--Nicholas Bouskill::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Ulas Karaoz::Lawrence Berkeley National Lab--Haifeng Geng::Sandia National Laboratories--Todd Lane::Sandia National Laboratories--Jennifer Pett-Ridge::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--Xavier Mayali::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--Eoin Brodie::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--", "title":"B21C-0468: A trait based dynamic energy budget approach to explore emergent microalgal community structure", "abstract":"Microalgae play important roles in the global carbon budget. Phytoplankton, including microalgae, are responsible for around 50% of global primary production, and also hold promise as a viable renewable biofuel source. Research has been underway for decades to realize the full potential of algal biofuels at the commercial scale, however, uni-algal ponds are typically threatened by collapse due to microalgal grazing and parasite invasions. Recently, it has been proposed that functionally diverse microalgal-bacterial communities can achieve high biomass and/or lipid yields, and are more stable (less susceptible to invasion) than a monoculture. Similar positive diversity-productivity relationships have been observed in a wide range of ecosystem studies, but the purposeful maintenance of a diverse microbiome is less common in managed systems. In our work, a trait based dynamic energy budget model was developed to explore emergent microalgal community structure under various environmental (e.g. light, temperature, nutrient availability) conditions. The complex algal community can be reduced into functional groups (guilds). Each guild (algae or bacteria) is characterized by distinct physiological traits (e.g. nutrient requirement, growth rate, substrate affinity, lipid production) constrained by biochemical trade-offs. These trait values are derived from literature and information encoded in genomic data. Metabolism of the algae and the bacterial species (symbiotic or non-symbiotic) are described within a dynamic energy budget framework. The model offers a mechanistic framework to predict the optimal microalgal community assemblage towards high productivity and resistance to invasion under prevailing environmental conditions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86062", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86063" } }
{"authors":"Natalie Zielinski::Texas A & M University College Station--Alejandro Orsi::Texas A & M University College Station--Cody Webb::Texas A & M University College Station--", "title":"C21A-0695: Currents and Transport across the eastern Sabrina Basin, East Antarctica", "abstract":"Freshwater budgets of some Antarctic continental shelf sectors are key to the global Meridional Overturning Circulation. Poorly understood interactions of marginal currents with glaciers and ice-shelves are reported to have a sea level rise potential of about 50 m. The Moscow University Ice Shelf (MUIS) and Totten Glacier (TG) system alone accounts for one-eighth of East Antarctic Ice Sheet discharge, roughly the same as estimated for total Western Antarctic Ice Sheet drainage. Observational studies of the circulation, stratification, and exchange of oceanic, shelf and melt waters in the adjacent Sabrina Basin began in in the austral summer of 2014, with a unique set of shipboard measurements aboard the RVI Nathaniel B. Palmer. Among them are, for the first time over Antarctic margins, simultaneous underway profiling of ocean currents, temperature and salinity. Optimally averaged and quality controlled data from the Shipboard Acoustic Dopper Current Profiler (SADCP) and Underway Conductivity/Temperature/Depth (uCTD) system are analyzed to map flow patterns from the surface to the bottom. Unprecedented spatial (~1 km) and temporal (~30 min) profiling allowed the completion of multiple synoptic sections that effectively resolved the main characteristics of the slope (ASC) and Antarctic Coastal Current (ACoC). Adjusted geostrophic currents and volume transport across these sections were calculated for density layers spanning surface and thermocline waters with oceanic and shelf origin. After following the western flank of the Dalton Ice Tongue (DIT) to the south, the ACoC turns westward and continues alonog the MUIS front toward TG. Injection of meltwater to the ACoC at varying levels is revealed along this path. Highly contrasting bottom topography is also observed to differentially steer bottom waters. A smooth sedimentary dome found below the Dalton Polynya appears to drive an interior recirculation; whereas a relaitvely rough and narrow escarpment flank in front of MUIS accelerates westward flow, channels inflow to sub-ice cavities and likely intensifies vertical mixing.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86063", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86064" } }
{"authors":"Eliot Atekwana::Oklahoma State University Main Campus--Gift Tsokonombwe::Geological Survey Department of malawi--James Elsenbeck::Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution--V. Dorsey Wanless::Boise State University--Estella Atekwana::Oklahoma State University Main Campus--", "title":"V13C-3162: Chemical and isotopic characteristics of hot springs along the along the Neogene Malawi rift.", "abstract":"We measured the concentrations of major ions and dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) and the stable isotopes of carbon (δ13CDIC), hydrogen (δD) and oxygen (δ18O) of hot springs along the Neogene Malawi rift. We compared the results with those of streams and a cold spring. We aimed to assess the hot springs for evidence of addition of mantle mass, specifically water and carbon and (2) determine the processes that control the chemical and isotopic evolution of the hot springs. Understanding the source(s) of heat for the springs and if the chemical and isotopic characteristics show evidence of mantle processes is an important goal of the Project for Rift Initiation, Development and Evolution (PRIDE). The temperature of the hot springs ranged from 35 to 80 ºC. High temperature anomalies are observed between latitudes 10 to 11, 12 to 13 and 15 to 16 degrees south along the rift axis. The δD and δ18O for the cold spring, hot springs and streams had a similar range, were positively correlated and lie on the trend of the local meteoric water line. We suggest negligible contribution of water from a connate or magmatic source and limited oxygen exchange from water-rock interaction or CO2 exchange from deep sedimentary carbonates. The DIC concentrations of the hot springs are higher (5 to 61 mg C/L) than those of streams (2 to 28 mg C/L) indicating addition of carbon to the DIC pool during the circulation of some springs. The range in the δ13CDIC of the hot springs (-17 to -8‰) is broader and lower compared to streams (-12 to -5‰) due to addition of carbon with a δ13CDIC of -15‰ to the spring water during circulation. Our results indicate that (1) the source of water for the hot springs is meteoric, (2) the hot springs have not experienced extensive water-rock interaction due to fast circulation suggesting highly permeable fault zones, (3) the source of carbon in the DIC of the hot springs is mostly CO2(g) from the soil zone and (4) the springs are heated by normal geothermal gradients by deep circulation along the faults.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86064", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86065" } }
{"authors":"Holger Sommer::University of the South Pacific Laucala--Klaus Regenauer-Lieb::University of New South Wales, North Ryde, NSW 2052--Dorrit Jacob::Macquarie University--Biliana Gasharova::ANKA/Inst. Synchotron Radiation, Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe GmbH, Hermann-von-Helmholtz-Platz,1--", "title":"V21C-3061: The Formation of Micro Diamonds in Dislocation Creep Controlled by the C:O:H Ratio of NAMS", "abstract":"Diamonds are expected to be formed in the diamond window under high-pressure conditions due to the polymorph graphite/diamond phase transition but they can also be formed by C:O:H bearing volatiles. In this study we present the formation of micro-diamonds in micro-cracks by C:O:H bearing fluids in a bimineralic eclogite. The studied rock sample is a kyanite- bearing and bimineralic eclocite from the Roberts Victor mine, South Africa. Relicts of the former kyanite bearing eclogite are still present within the bimineralic eclogite. The presence of these metastable relicts suggest very low fH2O during the phase transition from the kyanite- bearing into the bimineralic eclogite. The micro-diamond forming reaction was triggered by fluids during the breakdown of kyanite in the kyanite bearing eclogite. Our results show that the C:O:H ratio in the fluid controls the diamond-forming reaction as the ratio changes due to the movement of planar defect structures in garnet in the bimineralic eclogite. This process leads to the formation of isotopically light carbon molecules and under favorable thermodynamic, stoichiometric and kinetic conditions micro diamonds can be formed. High-spatial-resolution synchrotron based FT-IR and RAMAN spectrometry have been used to map the distribution of C:O:H-bearing volatiles around micro diamonds in planar defect structures in garnet. In micro diamond bearing planar defect structures, a correlation between C:O:H-bearing volatiles can be identified whereas in micro diamond free planar defect structures no correlation of the different C:O:H containing volatiles is visible. The conclusions from our study shows that C:O:H-bearing volatiles, and their distribution pattern around the studied micro cracks provide insight into the formation process of micro diamonds in natural bimineralic eclogites.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86065", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86066" } }
{"authors":"Yu Someya::Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute University of Tokyo--Ryoichi Imasu::University of Tokyo--Kei Shiomi::Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency--Naoko Saitoh::Chiba University--Yoshifumi Ota::Meteorological Research Institute--", "title":"A43B-0280: Improved slicing method for GOSAT cloud detection using TIR spectra", "abstract":"Greenhouse gas observing SATellite (GOSAT) is a polar orbiting satellite for greenhouse gas observations and the main sensor, TANSO-FTS, has three near-infrared bands and a thermal infrared (TIR) band which covers a wide spectral region of 5.56 – 14.3 mm with resolution of 0.2 cm-1. The algorithm used in this study was based on a cirrus detection technique called CO2 slicing method, modified as described below. The weighting functions which represent sensitivity profiles were calculated at each channel in the TIR band of GOSAT. The channels were reconstructed as sets of several spectral channels for each height level based on the peak heights of the weighting functions. Subsequently, the channel combinations were optimized based on simulation studies for several temperature profile patterns for each latitude and temperature at 500 hPa. The observed data in 2010 were analyzed using these optimized channels. Global cloud amounts and their seasonal variations were validated using Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observation (CALIPSO) data. Results show some differences of cloud amounts and heights between GOSAT and CALIPSO, which might be caused by surface temperature biases, the inverse layer, the difference of sensitivity of sensors, and marine stratocumulus clouds. However, the characteristics of horizontal distributions derived using the slicing method were generally agreed with those obtained from CALIPSO and reported in previous researches. In addition, comparison of cloud top height using collocated data showed good agreement and clouds with optical thickness less than 0.1 are detectable using this method.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86066", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86067" } }
{"authors":"Kaitao Li::RADI Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Zhengqiang Li::Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China--Donghui Li::State Environmental Protection Key Laboratory of Satellites Remote Sensing Applications--Hua Xu::RADI Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Yisong Xie::RADI Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Li Li::Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China--Xingfeng Chen::RADI Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Yan Ma::RADI Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Wei Huang::Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China State Environmental Protection Key Laboratory of Satellites Remote Sensing Applications--", "title":"A41A-0051: A New Method for Common Calibration of Sun-Sky-Lunar Photometer", "abstract":"A new calibration method is introduced to transfer extraterrestrial calibration coefficients to the moon measurements for a new sun-sky-lunar photometer, trade name CE318-T from CIMEL. The new transfer method has no relationship with lunar phase, therefore, the precision of the results is improved, and error analysis suggests that the uncertainty of the transferred method is about 2.2-2.6%, smaller than the lunar Langley calibrations. At the same time, the calibration time is also saved. The Sun-Sky-Lunar photometer numbered #1202 and located on the roof of Institute of remote sensing and digital earth (RADI) in Beijing was used in this study. The extraterrestrial calibration coefficients were got by using Langley calibration performed at Ali with a height of 5053 m above sea level in Tibet. The new lunar calibration coefficients were obtained with the new method. And then the nocturnal AODs were calculated, which are well consistent with the daytime observations. The differences between two AODs obtained with transferred calibration coefficients and lunar Langley method were also compared in this study. In this study, Lidar observation results was also presented to compare with the lunar observations, the results show that the nocturnal AODs have the same variation tendency and well consistence with the Lidar observations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86067", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86068" } }
{"authors":"Jessica Sanow::Boise State University--Jan Eitel::University of Idaho--", "title":"C13C-0828: Validation of the Autonomously Operating Terrestrial Laser Scanner", "abstract":"The Autonomously Operating Terrestrial Laser Scanner (ATLS) is a ground-based Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) system. ATLS technology has the potential to be used for snow measurement studies in locations that are unsafe or inaccessible to humans throughout the winter season. Alternative Terrestrial Laser Systems (TLS) have thus far proven to produce low temporal resolution and are high in cost. ATLS, on the other hand, is a unique system that can generate high temporal resolution at a low cost. In order for the progression of ATLS to continue, the data from the system needs to be validated by determining if ATLS scans are a viable method for the measurement of snow depth. To complete the validation, two specific objectives have been identified: 1) the ability of ATLS to measure snow depth and 2) to produce high quality resolution measurements over varying distances of ATLS scans. For this, both ATLS and validation measurements were taken throughout two winter seasons near McCall, Idaho. Preliminary results of the study indicate that the ATLS is capable of fulfilling these two objectives.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86068", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86069" } }
{"authors":"Durban Keeler::Brigham Young University--Summer Rupper::University of Utah--Joerg Schaefer::Columbia University of New York--Robert Finkel::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"PP31C-2267: Climate Reconstructions of the Younger Dryas: An ELA Model Investigating Variability in ELA Depressions, Temperature, and Precipitation Changes for the Graubϋnden Alps", "abstract":"The high sensitivity of mountain glaciers to even small perturbations in climate, combined with a near global distribution, make alpine glaciers an important target for terrestrial paleoclimate reconstructions. The geomorphic remnant of past glaciers can yield important insights into past climate, particularly in regions where other methods of reconstruction are not possible. The quantitative conversion of these changes in geomorphology to a climate signal, however, presents a significant challenge. A particular need exists for a versatile climate reconstruction method applicable to diverse glacierized regions around the globe. Because the glacier equilibrium line altitude (ELA) provides a more explicit comparison of climate than properties such as glacier length or area, ELA methods lend themselves well to such a need, and allow for a more direct investigation of the primary drivers of mountain glaciations during specific events. Here, we present an ELA model for quantifying changes in climate based on changes in glacier extent, while accounting for differences in glacier width, glacier shape, bed topography, ice thickness, and glacier length. The model furthermore provides bounds on the ΔELA using Monte Carlo simulations. These methods are validated using published mass balances and ELA measurements from 4 modern glaciers in the European Alps. We then use this ELA model, combined with a surface mass and energy balance model, to estimate the changes in temperature/precipitation between the Younger Dryas (constrained by 10Be surface exposure ages) and the present day for three glacier systems in the Graubϋnden Alps. Our results indicate an ELA depression in this area of 257 m ±45 m during the Younger Dryas (YD) relative to today. This corresponds to a 1.3 °C ±0.36 °C decrease in temperature or a 156% ±30% increase in precipitation relative to today. These results indicate the likelihood of a predominantly temperature-driven change rather than a strong dependence on precipitation. We apply these same methods to additional areas around the globe to obtain preliminary, self-consistent estimates of temperature/precipitation for multiple regions. These methods and results enhance our understanding of the global and regional patterns in the climate system during the YD.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86069", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86070" } }
{"authors":"Marcin Pilinski::Atmospheric and Space Technology Research Associates, LLC--Jeffrey Forbes::University of Colorado at Boulder--Scott Palo::University of Colorado at Boulder--", "title":"A53A-0371: Array of Neutral Density Relative Observations MEasuring Divergence in the Atmosphere (ANDROMEDA), A Constellation Concept for Studying Thermospheric Dynamics", "abstract":"In addition to being critical to the prediction of satellite orbits, total mass density is a fundamental property of the thermosphere. Density measurements from accelerometers on the CHAMP satellite have revealed quasi-steady state distributions of density structures around the globe, density responses to changing solar and geomagnetic activity, and spatial structures of wave-like phenomena along the orbit. However, a basic limitation on the time scale of any observable phenomenon is the ~90-minute orbital period. Thus, single-satellite missions like CHAMP are unable to measure the time derivative of density or the mass flux divergence (MFD) at a single point in the atmosphere. While the two accelerometer-carrying GRACE satellites could theoretically measure the density time derivative, in practice this measurement is hampered by the very low-signal levels in the tenuous atmosphere at the ~500-km GRACE orbits, as well as inter-satellite biases and drifts. The Array of Neutral Density Relative Observations Measuring Divergence in the Atmosphere (ANDROMEDA) is a constellation of CubeSats aimed at improving our understanding of atmospheric dynamics by measuring and interpreting the characteristics of traveling atmospheric disturbances as well as the distribution of MFD in the thermosphere. The ANDROMEDA constellation consists of two to three identical CubeSats spaced approximately 300 km apart and making multi-point measurements of total mass density with an accuracy of <2%. The mass density measurements will be made using a novel torque balance technique enabled by an extremely accurate attitude determination and control system (ADCS) that actively compensates for atmospheric disturbance torques. The benefit of the torque-balance technique is the high level of inter-satellite accuracy. The constellation will be deployed from the ISS and will make observations between 400 km and 250 km altitude as the satellite orbits decay. Distance between the spacecraft will be controlled by modifying the relative ballistic coefficients through small changes in the angle of attack. In this poster, we present the ANDROMEDA science objectives and requirement flow-down. We then describe the constellation design and present a series of measurement simulations showing the feasibility of this approach.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86070", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86071" } }
{"authors":"Noelynna Ramos::National Institute of Geological Sciences, University of the Philippines--Kathrine Maxwell::National Institute of Geological Sciences, University of the Philippines--Hiroyuki Tsutsumi::Kyoto University--Fucai Duan::National Taiwan University--Yu-Chen Chou::National Taiwan University--Chuan-Chou Shen::NTU National Taiwan University--", "title":"T53A-01: Emerged Coral Terraces in West Luzon, Philippines and Their Implications for Sea Level Changes and Coastal Uplift", "abstract":"We examined emergent coastal geomorphic features in Ilocos Norte, Ilocos Sur, and La Union to understand their implications for sea level changes and seismotectonics of the Manila trench subduction zone and associated upper plate structures. Raised coral terraces with recognizable notches and meter-scale terrace risers are often exposed and well preserved along promontories and nearby smaller islands. Varying elevations of the lower terrace were measured in Burgos and Badoc, Ilocos Norte (2 to 3 m amsl), San Esteban, Ilocos Sur (1.4 m amsl), and Bacnotan, La Union (1.2 m amsl). Initial 14C- and 230Th-dating of fossil corals from the lower terraces in Ilocos Norte, Ilocos Sur, and La Union reveals ages that range from ~7.5 ky to ~3.5 ky. Young coral ages (~1 ky) were meanwhile obtained from the upper terraces of Badoc Island, Ilocos Norte at 4 to 5 m amsl. Based on preliminary coral ages, we infer that the older (~7.5 ky to ~6 ky) fossil corals are related to the mid-Holocene marine transgression while younger attached corals (~1 kyr) could represent the age of the terrace surface prior to emergence. Alternatively, a large wave event may have also transported the young fossil corals on the mid-Holocene transgressive reef platform. Emergence of the coral terraces may be attributed to regional sea level changes and possibly accumulated uplift from aseismic and seismic processes along the Manila Trench and nearby faults. Varied deformation patterns of the raised coral terraces further provide constraints on local tectonic controls and upper plate structures of the subduction zone.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86071", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86072" } }
{"authors":"Nicholas Christen::San Francisco State University--David Dempsey::San Francisco State University--Alexander Stine::San Francisco State University--", "title":"GC23A-1131: Why Does the Leeward Side of Mt. Tamalpais Experience a Climatological Precipitation Maximum?", "abstract":"Climatological records show annual precipitation maximum values on the northeast side of Mt. Tamalpais in the San Francisco Bay Area, which is typically the leeward side during winter precipitation events. The town of Kentfield, CA, about five kilometers to the northeast of the mountain, has a significantly higher annual-average rainfall than adjacent locations, particularly compared with stations to its north and south. One hypothesis regarding this phenomenon is that the topography if Mt. Tamalpais creates convergence on the leeward side, thereby enhancing precipitation. If prevailing southwesterly winds during rainfall events are interrupted by the mountain and then flow around either side, converging on leeward side, then enhanced cloud formation and precipitation would replace the divergent flow characteristic to leeward slopes. A second hypothesis is that Mt. Tamalpais is narrow relative to the advective scale of orographically triggered precipitation. If the mountain is relatively narrow, precipitation from clouds generated orographically on the upwind side might not develop and fall until air within the clouds has reached the leeward side, where Kentfield lies. With a network of surface weather stations, we analyze precipitation accumulations to quantify the Kentfield rainfall maximum over a series of rainfall events during 2015. For these rainfall events, we evaluate how well a 1.1-km resolution WRF-ARW model reproduces the precipitation observations. To the extent that the model agrees with observations, we investigate mechanisms underlying the rainfall maximum by analyzing patterns of low-level wind convergence downwind of Mt. Tamalpais and patterns of vertical velocity and cloud and rain-water mixing ratios in vertical cross sections across Mt. Tamalpais, parallel to the wind flow for each rainfall event. Cross-sectional mixing ratio analyses provide evidence of precipitation development and advection and test the second of the aforementioned hypotheses. Wind convergence and vertical velocity produced by the model downwind of the mountain help test the plausibility of the first hypothesis.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86072", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86076" } }
{"authors":"Kei Ishida::University of California Davis--ML Kavvas::University of California Davis--Noriaki Ohara::University of Wyoming--Toan Trinh::University of California Davis--", "title":"GC23B-1144: Climate Change Effects on Snow-Precipitation Ratio over Northern California in the 21st Century", "abstract":"Snow-precipitation ratio over Northern California during the 21th Century was obtained by means of dynamical downscaling technique and physically-based snow model based on projected future scenarios. Then, climate change effects on the snow-precipitation ratio, and snow accumulation and melt processes were analyzed. The American River watershed (ARW), the Yuba River watershed (YRW), and the Upper Feather River watershed (UFRW) are selected as study watersheds in Northern California. Fifteen future projections based on Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES) A1, A2, and B1 scenarios projected by General Circulation Models (GCMs) are selected. The dynamical downscaled results, not only precipitation and temperature, but also humidity, wind field, and radiation, were used for inputs to a physically-based snow model. Before future climate simulations, the snow model was validated based on NCEP/NCAR Reanalysis data by comparing its results with snow water equivalent observation data. The simulated results by the snow model show good agreements with snow water equivalent at observation stations over the study watersheds. After the validation, the snow model was applied to the future scenarios. The snow simulation results show that the ratio of snow to precipitation gradually decreases over all over the three watersheds during the 21th century.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86076", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86077" } }
{"authors":"Chana Tilevitz::University of Michigan Ann Arbor University of Michigan--Christopher Poulsen::University of Michigan--", "title":"PP21C-2269: Influence of a dynamic ocean on Permian ice sheet growth", "abstract":"Previous studies using an atmospheric general circulation model have shown that extensive ice sheets can grow on the Gondwanan supercontinent during the late Paleozoic (~340-250 Ma) under modern orbital parameters and CO2 levels at or below two times pre-industrial values (CO2 ≤560 ppm). Proxy records for the late Paleozoic suggest a wide range of potential CO2 values, but the range of values that allows for the growth of large ice sheets is much smaller. A prescribed slab ocean with diffusive heat transport (using modern heat fluxes) was used for those experiments, but lacks the ability to accurately capture the ocean dynamics of the Paleozoic. Here, within the NCAR Community Earth System Model framework, we use a fully dynamic ocean model to explore Permian ice sheet growth under more realistic conditions. Fully coupled CESM simulations for two CO2 levels (280 & 560 ppm) are run until the ocean equilibrates (~1500-2000 years). Climatologies from those simulations are then used to drive a three-dimensional dynamic ice sheet model in an asynchronous coupling, in which the ice sheet model is run until the ice sheets equilibrate. The ice sheet geometry and height are then used to update the coupled ocean-atmosphere model, which is run for ~20 years, until the climate system re-equilibrates. Preliminary results show that ice sheet growth at the higher CO2 value is small in comparison with ice sheet growth in the lower CO2 environment, which is consistent with previous late Paleozoic modeling studies. The latitudinal temperature gradient is also steeper at 280 ppm CO2 than at 560 ppm, though the dynamic ocean buffers some of these changes relative to what they would be for a slab ocean.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86077", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86079" } }
{"authors":"Alan Li::Stanford University--Sigrid Close::Stanford University--", "title":"A53A-0372: Mean Density Estimation derived from Satellite Constellations", "abstract":"With the advent of nanosatellite constellations, we define here a new method to derive neutral densities of the lower thermosphere from multiple similar platforms travelling through same regions of space. Because of similar orbits, the satellites are expected to encounter similar mean neutral densities and hence experience similar drag if their drag coefficients are equivalent. Utilizing free molecular flow theory to bound the minimum possible drag coefficient possible and order statistics to give a statistical picture of the distribution, we are able to estimate the neutral density alongside its associated error bounds. Data sources for this methodology can either be from already established Two Line Elements (TLEs) or from raw data sources, in which an additional filtering step needs to be performed to estimate relevant parameters. The effects of error in the filtering step of the methodology are also discussed and can be removed if the error distribution is Gaussian in nature. This method does not depend on prior models of the atmosphere, but instead is based upon physics models of simple shapes in free molecular flow. With a constellation of 10 satellites, we can achieve a standard deviation of roughly 4% on the estimated mean neutral density. As additional satellites are included in the estimation scheme, the result converges towards the lower limit of the achievable drag coefficient, and accuracy becomes limited by the quality of the ranging measurements and the probability of the accommodation coefficient. Data is provided courtesy of Planet Labs and comparisons are made to existing atmospheric models such as NRLMSISE-00 and JB2006.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86079", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86080" } }
{"authors":"Marc Hirschmann::Univ Minnesota--Hongluo Zhang::Univ Minnesota--Elizabeth Cottrell::Smithsonian, NMNH--", "title":"V31D-3049: Revised Mossbauer Calibration for Fe3+/FeT of XANES Basalt Standards: Implications for MORB", "abstract":"Among techniques for determining Fe3+/FeT of natural glasses, XANES affords high precision, spatial resolution, and sample throughput and consequently has become widely used. However, because XANES determinations depend on standardization against materials of known Fe3+/FeT, they are only as accurate as the methods used for calibration. In many cases, calibration is performed with Mossbauer spectroscopy. Accurate determination of Fe3+/FeT by Mossbauer spectroscopy is the subject of a long-standing controversy, in part owing to debate as to the influence of recoilless fraction on the area ratios of room temperature (RT) Mossbauer absorption doublets associated with paramagnetic Fe2+ and Fe3+ in silicate glasses. Recoilless fraction effects for glasses are comparatively subtle, and so characterization efforts have not always produced statistically resolvable effects, in part because glasses produce broadened line shapes that degrade analytical precision, but both theoretical considerations of bond strengths and abundant evidence from minerals demonstrate that RT Mossbauer analyses will overestimate Fe3+/FeTof Fe-bearing silicates. Cottrell & Kelley (2011) used the basalt XANES calibration of Cottrell et al. (2009) to show that the average Fe3+/FeT of MORB glasses is close to 0.16, but this calibration depends chiefly on RT Mossbauer spectra of a suite of standard glasses. New cryogenic (10 K) Mossbauer spectra of these same glasses suggests a correction factor, C, of 1.1, where [Fe3+/FeT(corrected)]=[Fe3+/FeT (RT)]/([Fe3+/FeT (RT)]+C(1-[Fe3+/FeT(RT)]). If this correction is applied to the XANES data, the median of MORB glasses is ~0.15. Because recoilless fractions are not exactly unity even at 10 K, this correction represents a minimum; however the 10 K data are in good agreement with Fe3+/FeT predicted for the Mossbauer standards by the wet-chemistry-based model of Kress and Carmichael (1991) based on the synthesis fO2. The precision of XANES for the determination of Fe3+/FeT is ±0.005; the absolute accuracy is tied to the accuracy of the technique used to calibrate. For Mossbauer, accuracy is likely closer to ±0.02", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86080", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86082" } }
{"authors":"Felipe Aron::Pontifical Catholic University of Chile Stanford University--Samuel Johnstone::Stanford University--Andreas Mavrommatis::Stanford University--Robert Sare::Stanford University--George Hilley::Stanford University--", "title":"T43E-01: Paleogeodesy of the Southern Santa Cruz Mountains Frontal Thrusts, Silicon Valley, CA", "abstract":"We present a method to infer long-term fault slip rate distributions using topography by coupling a three-dimensional elastic boundary element model with a geomorphic incision rule. In particular, we used a 10-m-resolution digital elevation model (DEM) to calculate channel steepness (ksn) throughout the actively deforming southern Santa Cruz Mountains in Central California. We then used these values with a power-law incision rule and the Poly3D code to estimate slip rates over seismogenic, kilometer-scale thrust faults accommodating differential uplift of the relief throughout geologic time. Implicit in such an analysis is the assumption that the topographic surface remains unchanged over time as rock is uplifted by slip on the underlying structures. The fault geometries within the area are defined based on surface mapping, as well as active and passive geophysical imaging. Fault elements are assumed to be traction-free in shear (i.e., frictionless), while opening along them is prohibited. The free parameters in the inversion include the components of the remote strain-rate tensor (εij) and the bedrock resistance to channel incision (K), which is allowed to vary according to the mapped distribution of geologic units exposed at the surface. The nonlinear components of the geomorphic model required the use of a Markov chain Monte Carlo method, which simulated the posterior density of the components of the remote strain-rate tensor and values of K for the different mapped geologic units. Interestingly, posterior probability distributions of εij and K fall well within the broad range of reported values, suggesting that the joint use of elastic boundary element and geomorphic models may have utility in estimating long-term fault slip-rate distributions. Given an adequate DEM, geologic mapping, and fault models, the proposed paleogeodetic method could be applied to other crustal faults with geological and morphological expressions of long-term uplift.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86082", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86083" } }
{"authors":"Don Stott::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Matthew Mayernik::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Michael Daniels::National Center for Atmospheric Research--James Moore::NCAR--Steven Williams::National Center for Atmospheric Research--John Allison::National Center for Atmospheric Research--", "title":"IN21D-1720: The Bering Sea Project Archive: a Prototype for Improved Discovery and Access", "abstract":"The Bering Sea Project was a research program from 2007 through 2012 that sought to understand the impacts of climate change and dynamic sea ice cover on the eastern Bering Sea ecosystem. More than 100 scientists engaged in field data collection, original research, and ecosystem modeling to link climate, physical oceanography, plankton, fishes, seabirds, marine mammals, humans, traditional knowledge and economic outcomes. Over the six-year period of the program hundreds of multidisciplinary datasets coming from a variety of instrumentation and measurement platforms within thirty-one categories of research were processed and curated by the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Earth Observing Laboratory (EOL). For the investigator proposing a field project, the researcher performing synthesis, or the modeler seeking data for verification, the easy discovery and access to the most relevant data is of prime importance. The heterogeneous products of oceanographic field programs such as the Bering Sea Project challenge the ability of researchers to identify which data sets, people, or tools might be relevant to their research, and to understand how certain data, instruments, or methods were used to produce particular results. EOL, as a partner in the NSF funded EarthCollab project, is using linked open data to permit the direct interlinking of information and data across platforms and projects. We are leveraging an existing open-source semantic web application, VIVO, to address connectivity gaps across distributed networks of researchers and resources and identify relevant content, independent of location. We will present our approach in connecting ontologies and integrating them within the VIVO system, using the Bering Sea Project datasets as a case study, and will provide insight into how the geosciences can leverage linked data to produce more coherent methods of information and data discovery across large multi-disciplinary projects.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86083", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86084" } }
{"authors":"Christopher Pawlyszyn::Appalachian State University--Matthew West::Appalachian State University--James Sherman::Appalachian State University--Michael Link::Colorado State University--Yong Zhou::Colorado State University--", "title":"A41K-0222: Background Southeast United States Aerosol Optical Properties and Their Dependence Upon Meteorology", "abstract":"Aerosol effects on SE U.S. radiation budget are highly-seasonal. Aerosol loading is much higher in summer, due largely to high levels of biogenic secondary organic aerosol and sulfates. Aerosol loading is lowest in winter. Aerosol optical properties relevant to radiative forcing have been measured continuously at the Appalachian Atmospheric Interdisciplinary Research facility (AppalAIR) since the summer of 2009. AppalAIR is the only site in the eastern US to house co-located NOAA ESRL and NASA AeroNET instrumentation and is located in the mountains of Boone, NC. Lower tropospheric sub-micron (PM1) light scattering and absorption coefficients measured over seven summers and six winters are presented here, in addition to PM1 organic and sulfate aerosol mass concentrations measured during summers 2012-2013 as well as winter 2013. The objective is to determine the influence of aerosol sources and meteorology along the air mass back-trajectories on aerosol loading and composition. PM1 aerosol mass was dominated by organic aerosol and sulfate during the periods measured. Aerosol light scattering and organic aerosol concentrations were positively correlated during summer with temperature and solar flux along the parcel back-trajectory and negatively-correlated with rainfall along the back-trajectory. Wet deposition was a major factor in the difference between the upper and lower scattering coefficient quartiles for both summer and winter. Summer PM1 light scattering coefficient declined by approximately 30-40% since 2009, with smaller decreases during winter months. Long-term studies of aerosol optical properties from the regionally-representative AppalAIR site are necessary to determine the relationships between changing SE U.S. air quality and aerosol effects on regional climate and weather.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86084", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86085" } }
{"authors":"Hongbo Zhang::IAP Insititute of Atmospheric Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Gaopeng Lu::Institute of Atmospheric Physics, CAS--Xiushu Qie::IAP Insititute of Atmospheric Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Rubin Jiang::IAP Insititute of Atmospheric Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences--", "title":"AE31C-0457: A preliminary study of thunderstorm tracking based on single-station observations of NBEs", "abstract":"Based on an developed three-dimensional (3D) location method of narrow bipolar events (NBEs) with single-station measurement of low-frequency (LF) magnetic fields, we examined two typical thunderstorms (on August 17, 2013 and August 17, 2013, respectively) in North China and obtained the location of 700 and 387 NBEs. The results were evaluated by comparing with radar observations, showing that NBEs occurred mainly in strong echo area. NBEs located with our method are distributed between 6-18 km with a clear dividing line at about 14 km: positive NBEs (84%) occurred mainly in 6-14 km while the negative (16%) concentrated in 14-18 km, consistent with previous work based on the detection of multi-station network. The comparison of results at different stages showed that the trend of NBEs occurrence was consistent with the thunderstorm motion, and the location data averaged over 30-minute time window evidently proved the tracking capability of NBE detection for severe thunderstorms. Therefore, the NBE detection based on the single-station magnetic measurement could be used as a convenient approach for monitoring the development of convective thunderstorms, especially when they are far beyond the detection range of meteorological radars. New measurements in summer of 2015 will be examined by comparing the location result with that derived from a long-baseline network of LF magnetic sensors using the time-of-arrival technique.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86085", "section":"Atmospheric and Space Electricity"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86086" } }
{"authors":"Naia Morueta-Holme::University of California Berkeley--Nicole Heller::Organization Not Listed--Blair McLaughlin::University of Idaho--Stuart Weiss::Creekside Center for Earth Observation--David Ackerly::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"GC13J-04: Assessing vulnerable and expanding vegetation stands and species in the San Francisco Bay Area for conservation management under climate change", "abstract":"The distribution of suitable climatic areas for species and vegetation types is expected to shift due to ongoing climate change. While the pace at which current distributions will shift is hard to quantify, predictions of where climatically suitable areas will be in the future can allow us to map 1) areas currently occupied by a species or vegetation type unlikely to persist through the end of this century (vulnerable stands), 2) areas likely to do better in the future and serve as nuclei for population expansion (expanding stands), and 3) areas likely to act as climate refugia (persisting stands). We quantified the vulnerability of 27 individual plant species and 27 vegetation types in the San Francisco Bay Area as well as the conservation importance, vulnerability, and resilience of selected management sites for climate change resilient conservation. To this end, we developed California-wide models of species and vegetation distributions using climate data from the 2014 California Basin Characterization Model at a 270 m resolution, projected to 18 different end-of century climate change scenarios. Combining these distribution models with high resolution maps of current vegetation, we were able to map projected vulnerable, expanding, and persisting stands within the Bay Area. We show that vegetation and species are expected to shift considerably within the study region over the next decades; although we also identify refugia potentially able to offset some of the negative impacts of climate change. We discuss the implications for managers that wish to incorporate climate change in conservation decisions, in particular related to choosing species for restoration, identifying areas to collect seeds for restoration, and preparing for expected major vegetation changes. Our evaluation of individual management sites highlights the need for stronger coordination of efforts across sites to prioritize monitoring and protection of species whose ranges are contracting elsewhere. Finally, we present and discuss novel ways in visualizing and communicating condensed predictions and their uncertainty to land managers and challenges inherent. This work is part of the Terrestrial Biodiversity and Climate Change Collaborative, committed to developing a scientific basis for climate adaptation conservation strategies.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86086", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86087" } }
{"authors":"Heather Dalton::Lunar and Planetary Institute--Stephanie Shipp::Lunar and Planetary Institute--Christine Shupla::Lunar and Planetary Institute--Andrew Shaner::Lunar and Planetary Institute--Keliann LaConte::Lunar and Planetary Institute--", "title":"ED43D-0896: Partnering to Enhance Planetary Science Education and Public Outreach Programs", "abstract":"The Lunar and Planetary Institute (LPI) in Houston, Texas utilizes many partners to support its multi-faceted Education and Public Outreach (E/PO) program. The poster will share what we have learned about successful partnerships. One portion of the program is focused on providing training and NASA content and resources to K-12 educators. Teacher workshops are performed in several locations per year, including LPI and the Harris County Department of Education, as well as across the country in cooperation with other programs and NASA Planetary Science missions. To serve the public, LPI holds several public events per year called Sky Fest, featuring activities for children, telescopes for night sky viewing, and a short scientist lecture. For Sky Fest, LPI partners with the NASA Johnson Space Center Astronomical Society; they provide the telescopes and interact with members of the public as they are viewing celestial objects. International Observe the Moon Night (InOMN) is held annually and involves the same aspects as Sky Fest, but also includes partners from Johnson Space Center’s Astromaterials Research and Exploration Science group, who provide Apollo samples for the event. Another audience that LPI E/PO serves is the NASA Planetary Science E/PO community. Partnering efforts for the E/PO community include providing subject matter experts for professional development workshops and webinars, connections to groups that work with diverse and underserved audiences, and avenues to collaborate with groups such as the National Park Service and the Afterschool Alliance. Additional information about LPI’s E/PO programs can be found at http://www.lpi.usra.edu/education. View a list of LPI E/PO’s partners here: http://www.lpi.usra.edu/education/partners/.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86087", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86088" } }
{"authors":"Xavier Comas::Florida Atlantic University--William Wright::Florida Atlantic University--Scott Hynek::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--Joe Orlando::Pennsylvania State University--Dimitrios Ntarlagiannis::Rutgers University Newark--Heather Buss::University of Bristol--Susan Brantley::Earth and Environmental Systems Institute--", "title":"H51R-08: Understanding the architecture of the deep critical zone in the Rio Icacos watershed (Luquillo Critical Zone Observatory, Puerto Rico) using a combination of hydrogeophysical methods.", "abstract":"The Rio Icacos watershed in the Luquillo Mountains (Puerto Rico) is characterized by rapid weathering rates and the accelerated development of a regolith mainly originated from the alteration of quartz diorite bedrock. Regolith materials create a blanket on top of the bedrock with a thickness that depends on its spatial distribution along the watershed (i.e. proximity to the river nickpoint in the southermost part of the watershed). Furthermore bedrock along the watershed is characterized by a system of heterogeneous fractures that apparently drive the formation of corestones and associated spheroidal fracturing and rindlets. In this study we used a combination of geophysical methods to better understand changes in regolith thickness and how the spatial distribution and density of fractures varies with topography and proximity to the nickpoint. Indirect and non-invasive geophysical methods included ground penetrating radar, GPR, terrain conductivity, and electrical resistivity imaging, ERI, and were constrained with direct methods (i.e. boreholes) already available from previous studies. Geophysical methods were consistent in imaging lateral changes in regolith distribution and fracture density along the watershed and showed the potential of multi-method approaches to better understand critical zone processes at multiple scales of measurement and high spatial resolution.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86088", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86089" } }
{"authors":"Tsung-Yu Lee::NTNU National Taiwan Normal University--Jr-Chuan Huang::National Taiwan University--Jun-Yi Lee::National Taiwan University--Shih-Hao Jien::National Pingtung University of Science and Technology--Franz Zehetner::University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences--Shuh-Ji Kao::Xiamen University--", "title":"H51N-1597: Disproportionately Magnified Sediment Export in Response to Increased Event Runoff: Analysis of Long-term Data from Mountainous Rivers in Taiwan", "abstract":"Fluvial sediment export from small mountainous rivers in Oceania dominates the global land-to-ocean sediment delivery, which might be speeding up at the recognized conditions of increased rainfall intensity. In this study, the historical runoff and sediment export from 16 major rivers in Taiwan are investigated and separated into an early stage (1970-1989) and a recent stage (1990-2010) to illustrate the changes of both runoff and sediment export. The mean daily sediment export from Taiwan Island in the recent stage significantly increased by >80% with subtle increase in daily runoff, indicating more sediment being delivered to the ocean per unit of runoff in the recent stage. In the early stage, 1 km3 runoff could transport sediment of 1.10 Mt. However, the 2x larger runoff now transported 3.38 Mt sediment which is ~3x larger than in the early stage. The medians of the runoff depth and sediment yield extremes (99.0-99.9 percentiles) among the 16 rivers increased by 6.5%-37% and 62%-94%, respectively, reflecting the disproportionately magnified response of sediment export to the increased runoff. Taiwan is facing increasing event rainfall intensity which has resulted in chain reactions on magnified runoff and sediment export responses. As the globe is warming, rainfall extremes, which are proved to be temperature-dependent, very likely intensify runoff and trigger more sediment associated hazards. This seems the Taiwan’s destiny facing high rainfall intensity and having erodible lithology. We are afraid that so far engineering still could not resist the power of nature.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86089", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86090" } }
{"authors":"Audrey Douglas::Texas A & M University Corpus Christi--Dorina Murgulet::Texas A & M University Corpus Christi--Nicholas Spalt::Texas A & M University Corpus Christi--", "title":"H33C-1606: Identifying Groundwater Discharge Sources and Associated Geochemical Influences Using Resistivity Imaging and Geochemical Tracers in a Semi-Arid Estuary in South Texas", "abstract":"The Nueces Bay (NB) system has been found to be ecologically unsound due to the loss/alteration of habitat and flow regimes required by indicator species and compromised nutrient cycling and sediment loading. The management practices of freshwater inflow regimes to NB concentrates on surface water flows and does not account for groundwater inflows, though submarine groundwater discharge (SGD) has been identified as a source of freshwater and limiting nutrients that could significantly impact bay salinities and nutrient loading. To encompass the range of spatio-temporal variabilities occurring between groundwater (GW) and surface-water (SW), multiple methods, including resistivity imaging, geochemical tracers, and radioisotopes, are applied in conjunction to identify SGD sources. Preliminary continuous resistivity profile surveys identified multiple possible GW upwelling paths from which thirteen stations were chosen in NB and two stations in Nueces River (NR). A Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of initial geochemical, nutrient and radioisotope data, shows that 76% of the variation in the data is explained by three factors: seasonality, freshwater inflows, and reducing environment. Significant seasonal variation is seen in average SW salinity (37psu in September 2014 to 4psu in June 2015), Ra-224 (359dpm/L in September to 636dpm/L in December), Ra-226 (268dpm/L in September to 570 dpm/L in December), ammonium (1.3μM in September to 5.5μM in April), and chlorophyll-α (3.99μg/L in December to 12.3 μg/L in April). Additionally, short-lived radioisotopes Rn-222 and Ra-224 are consistently elevated near the NR mouth, the inflow from Gum Hollow Creek, and a single station in the middle of the Bay indicating more localized, active SGD sources. However, only the stations in NR and at the NR mouth show consistently strong correlations to chlorophyll-α, phosphate, and silicate, with the river station closest to NB having the highest concentrations of nitrogen nutrients and the river station furthest from NB having the lowest. Thus there appears to be a SGD source in NR near the mouth that is contributing more nitrogen nutrients to NB than the river would alone. This study demonstrates the necessity for a multi-method approach to assessing SGD coastal embayments in the presence of SW inflows.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86090", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86091" } }
{"authors":"Olivia Nigro::University of Hawaii at Manoa--Michael Rappe::University of Hawaii at Manoa--Sean Jungbluth::University of Southern California--Huei-Ting Lin::University of Hawaii at Manoa--Grieg Steward::University of Hawaii at Manoa--", "title":"B14E-05: Archaeal Viruses Contribute to the Novel Viral Assemblage Inhabiting Oceanic, Basalt-Hosted Deep Subsurface Crustal Fluids", "abstract":"Fluids contained in the basalt-hosted deep subsurface of the world’s oceans represent one of the most inaccessible and understudied biospheres on earth. Recent improvements in sampling infrastructure have allowed us to collect large volumes of crustal fluids (~104 L) from Circulation Obviation Retrofit Kits (CORKs) placed in boreholes located on the eastern flank of the Juan de Fuca Ridge (JdFR). We detected viruses within these fluids by TEM and epifluorescence microscopy in samples collected from 2010 to 2014. Viral abundance, determined by epifluorescence counts, indicated that concentrations of viruses in subsurface basement fluids (~105  ml-1) are lower than the overlying seawater, but are higher in abundance than microbial cells in the same samples. Analysis of TEM images revealed distinct viral morphologies (rod and spindle-shaped) that resemble the morphologies of viral families infecting archaea. There are very few, if any, direct observations of these viral morphologies in marine samples, although they have been observed in enrichment cultures and their signature genes detected in metagenomic studies from hydrothermal vents and marine sediments. Analysis of metagenomes from the JdFR crustal fluids revealed sequences with homology to archaeal viruses from the rudiviridae, bicaudaviridae and fuselloviridae. Prokaryotic communities in fluids percolating through the basaltic basement rock of the JdFR flank are distinct from those inhabiting the overlying sediments and seawater. Similarly, our data support the idea that the viral assemblage in these fluids is distinct from viral assemblages in other marine and terrestrial aquatic environments. Our data also suggest that viruses contribute to the mortality of deep subsurface prokaryotes through cell lysis, and viruses may alter the genetic potential of their hosts through the processes of lysogenic conversion and horizontal gene transfer.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86091", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86092" } }
{"authors":"Teresa Yamana::Columbia University of New York--Jeffrey Shaman::Columbia University of New York--", "title":"PA11A-2148: Real-time forecasts of dengue epidemics", "abstract":"Dengue is a mosquito-borne viral disease prevalent in the tropics and subtropics, with an estimated 2.5 billion people at risk of transmission. In many areas with endemic dengue, disease transmission is seasonal but prone to high inter-annual variability with occasional severe epidemics. Predicting and preparing for periods of higher than average transmission is a significant public health challenge. Here we present a model of dengue transmission and a framework for optimizing model simulations with real-time observational data of dengue cases and environmental variables in order to generate ensemble-based forecasts of the timing and severity of disease outbreaks. The model-inference system is validated using synthetic data and dengue outbreak records. Retrospective forecasts are generated for a number of locations and the accuracy of these forecasts is quantified.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86092", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86093" } }
{"authors":"Weidong Yang::Universities Space Research Association Greenbelt--Alexander Marshak::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Patrick McBride::Atmospheric and Space Technology Research Associates, LLC--Jui-Yuan Chiu::University of Reading--Yuri Knyazikhin::Boston University--Sebastian Schmidt::University of Colorado--Connor Flynn::PNNL--Ernie Lewis::Brookhaven National Laboratory--Edwin Eloranta::University of Wisconsin--", "title":"A51I-0195: Observation of the spectral-invariant properties of clouds in transition zones during MAGIC, A case study", "abstract":"The time-resolved hyper spectral measurements during MAGIC provide a unique opportunity to study both clouds and aerosols in transition zones between cloudy and clear skies. This presentation presents the spectral-invariant properties of cloud transition zones observed on two cases of July, 2013 using the measurements from the Shortwave Array Spectroradiometer-Zenith (SAS-Ze) and the Solar Spectral Flux Radiometer (SSFR). Though radiance measurements from the two instruments can be different possibly due to the calibration drifting, the spectral-invariant properties observed on the two instruments show some common features. These features indicate that the overall cloud effective particle size likely decreases during the transition from cloudy to clear skies in the two cases.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86093", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86095" } }
{"authors":"Simon Barker::University of Auckland--Colin Wilson::Victoria University of Wellington--Dan Morgan::University of Leeds--Julie Rowland::University of Auckland--Ian Schipper::Victoria University of Wellington--", "title":"V31B-3034: Processes Influencing the Timing and Volume of Eruptions From the Youngest Supervolcano on Earth", "abstract":"In their stratigraphic records, silicic caldera volcanoes display wide ranges of eruptive styles and volumes. However, relationships between frequency and magnitude are often complex, and the forecasting of future activity is inherently problematic. Taupo volcano, New Zealand, provides a unique opportunity to investigate eruptive histories from a hyperactive, large silicic magmatic system with eruptive volumes that span 3-4 orders of magnitude, and show no clear relationships with the repose period. Taupo hosted the world’s most recent supereruption at 25.4 ka, which discharged 530 km3 of magma in the episodic 10-phase Oruanui event. Only 5 kyr later, Taupo revived, with 3 dacitic eruptions from 21.5-17 ka and 25 rhyolite eruptions from 12-1.7 ka. Here we use trends in whole rock, glass and mineral chemistry to show how the magma system reestablished following the Oruanui event, and to consider what processes influence the state of the modern volcano. The post-Oruanui dacites reflect the first products of the rebuilding silicic magma system, as most of the Oruanui mush was reconfigured or significantly modified in composition following thermal fluxing accompanying post-caldera collapse readjustment. Compositional variations within the younger rhyolites at <12 ka reflect fine-scale temporal changes in mineral phase stability, closely linked to the development, stabilization and maturation of a new silicic mush system. For the most recent eruptions, the system underwent destabilization, resulting in increased volumes of melt extraction from the silicic mush. Orthopyroxene Fe-Mg diffusion timescales indicate that the onset of rapid heating and priming of the silicic mush occurred <100 years prior to the <2.15 ka eruptions, with subsequent melt accumulation occurring in only decades. The largest post-Oruanui eruption at 232 AD culminated from elevated mafic magma supply to the silicic mush pile, rapid melt accumulation and high differential tectonic stress build up, leading to one of the largest and most violent Holocene eruptions globally. The latest eruptions of Taupo highlight the multiple controls on the timing of eruptions, and demonstrate how the magmatic system can rapidly change behavior to generate large eruptible melt bodies on timescales of direct relevance to humans and monitoring initiatives.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86095", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86096" } }
{"authors":"Carol Paty::Georgia Inst. of Technology--Josef Dufek::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--Alexia Payan::Georgia Inst. of Technology--", "title":"P11C-2114: Examining the interaction of Europa with the Jovian magnetosphere using eruptive and multifluid plasma dynamic simulations", "abstract":"Jupiter’s icy moon Europa provides a unique laboratory for understanding the physics of moon-magnetosphere interactions. Europa possesses a conductive subsurface ocean, the interaction of which with the locally varying Jovian magnetic field is expressed by the observed inductive response. This icy moon also boasts a dynamic exosphere as well as eruptive plumes, which interact with the Jovian plasma as expressed via ultraviolet aurora. We investigate a broad range of parameter space related to the interaction of this icy moon with the rapidly rotating magnetosphere of Jupiter, systematically working through and quantifying various physical effects using a multifluid plasma dynamic modeling framework. Aside from induction and interactions with the exosphere, we will also present preliminary result from incorporating a neutral plume generated by an eruptive simulation. We run conduit simulations to get at neutral gas and particle injection velocities, which are in turn used as a source for the plasma dynamic simulations. We then investigate the distribution of neutrals, ions, and charged grains as a function of altitude.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86096", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86097" } }
{"authors":"Takane Hori::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology--Tsuyoshi Ichimura::Earthquake Research Institute, University of Tokyo--", "title":"T33E-2973: A proposal of monitoring and forecasting system for crustal activity in and around Japan using a large-scale high-fidelity finite element simulation codes", "abstract":"Here we propose a system for monitoring and forecasting of crustal activity, especially great interplate earthquake generation and its preparation processes in subduction zone. Basically, we model great earthquake generation as frictional instability on the subjecting plate boundary. So, spatio-temporal variation in slip velocity on the plate interface should be monitored and forecasted. Although, we can obtain continuous dense surface deformation data on land and partly at the sea bottom, the data obtained are not fully utilized for monitoring and forecasting. It is necessary to develop a physics-based data analysis system including (1) a structural model with the 3D geometry of the plate interface and the material property such as elasticity and viscosity, (2) calculation code for crustal deformation and seismic wave propagation using (1), (3) inverse analysis or data assimilation code both for structure and fault slip using (1)&(2). To accomplish this, it is at least necessary to develop highly reliable large-scale simulation code to calculate crustal deformation and seismic wave propagation for 3D heterogeneous structure. Actually, Ichimura et al. (2014, SC14) has developed unstructured FE non-linear seismic wave simulation code, which achieved physics-based urban earthquake simulation enhanced by 10.7 BlnDOF x 30 K time-step. Ichimura et al. (2013, GJI) has developed high fidelity FEM simulation code with mesh generator to calculate crustal deformation in and around Japan with complicated surface topography and subducting plate geometry for 1km mesh. Further, for inverse analyses, Errol et al. (2012, BSSA) has developed waveform inversion code for modeling 3D crustal structure, and Agata et al. (2015, this meeting) has improved the high fidelity FEM code to apply an adjoint method for estimating fault slip and asthenosphere viscosity. Hence, we have large-scale simulation and analysis tools for monitoring. Furthermore, we are developing the methods for forecasting the slip velocity variation on the plate interface. Basic concept is given in Hori et al. (2014, Oceanography) introducing ensemble based sequential data assimilation procedure. Although the prototype described there is for elastic half space model, we will apply it for 3D heterogeneous structure with the high fidelity FE model.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86097", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86098" } }
{"authors":"Tangdong Qu::University of Hawaii at Manoa--", "title":"OS53A-2010: What controls the sea surface salinity variability in the equatorial Pacific?", "abstract":"Results from a model of the Consortium for Estimating the Circulation and Climate of the Ocean (ECCO) indicate that the long-term averaged surface freshwater flux is well balanced by ocean dynamics, in which subsurface processes account for a major part. Both surface freshwater flux and ocean dynamics are at work in generating the sea surface salinity variability in the equatorial Pacific. Particular attention is paid to the vertical entrainment of high salinity water from below. Water of subtropical origin resurfaces in the equatorial Pacific, directly contributing to the sea surface salinity variability there. Both the volume and barycenter of the resurfacing subtropical water show a strong ENSO signal. Their possible role in ENSO evolution is discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86098", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86099" } }
{"authors":"Zhou Chen::Hohai University--Zhifang Zhou::Hohai University--Jinguo WANG::Hohai University--Qiaona Guo::Hohai University--Zhi Dou::Hohai University--", "title":"H23B-1591: Effect of roughness on water flow through a single rough fracture", "abstract":"A single fracture (SF) usually has rough surfaces with points of contact. Though relative roughness was considered in quantifying flow through a single rough fracture (SRF) previously, additional factors such as the distribution of rough elements and bending degree of streamlines are rarely considered before. Semi-empirical friction factor (f) and discharge per unit width (q) equations are first deduced based on the consideration of relative roughness, roughness elements distribution and streamline reattachment length in this study. A horizontal SRF model is set up and a series of experiments and simulations are performed. Main conclusions are drawn: recirculation of streamlines occurred in the rough element and its intensity increases with the entering angle of the streamlines into the element and Reynolds number (Re); streamlines are discontinuously distributed when asperity height is large, leading to departure from Darcy’s law (non-linear flow); the non-linearity of flow increases with the asperity height and Re; the relative roughness for not affecting water flow through a SRF should be much less than 0.033, a benchmark value commonly used previously for neglecting the roughness effect; the revised f and q equations under laminar flow through a SRF are shown to be better than previously proposed equations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86099", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86100" } }
{"authors":"Prajjwal Panday::Woods Hole Research Center--Michael Coe::The Woods Hole Research Center--Marcia Macedo::Woods Hole Research Center--Paul Lefebvre::Woods Hole Research Center--Leandro Castello::Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University--", "title":"B53C-0562: Historical and potential future impacts of extreme hydrological events on the Amazonian floodplain hydrology and inundation dynamics", "abstract":"The Amazonian floodplains and wetlands cover one fifth of the basin and are highly productive promoting diverse biological communities and sustaining human populations with fisheries. Seasonal inundation of the floodplains fluctuates in response to drought or extreme rainfall as observed in the recent droughts of 2005 and 2010 where river levels dropped to among the lowest recorded. We model and evaluate the historical (1940–2010) and projected future (2010-2100) impacts of droughts and floods on the floodplain hydrology and inundation dynamics in the central Amazon using the Integrated Biosphere Simulator (IBIS) and the Terrestrial Hydrology Model and Biogeochemistry (THMB). Simulated discharge correlates well with observed discharges for tributaries originating in Brazil but underestimates basins draining regions in the non-Brazilian Amazon (Solimões, Japuŕa, Madeira, and Negro) by greater than 30%. A volume bias-correction from the simulated and observed runoff was used to correct the input precipitation across the major tributaries of the Amazon basin that drain the Andes. Simulated hydrological parameters (discharge, inundated area and river height) using corrected precipitation has a strong correlation with field measured discharge at gauging stations, surface water extent data (Global Inundation Extent from Multi-Satellites (GIEMS) and NASA Earth System Data Records (ESDRs) for inundation), and satellite radar altimetry (TOPEX/POSEIDON altimeter data for 1992–1998 and ENVISAT data for 2002–2010). We also used an ensemble of model outputs participating in the IPCC AR5 to drive two sets of simulations with and without carbon dioxide fertilization for the 2006–2100 period, and evaluated the potential scale and variability of future changes in discharge and inundation dynamics due to the influences of climate change and vegetation response to carbon dioxide fertilization. Preliminary modeled results for future scenarios using Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP) 4.5 indicate decreases in projected discharge and extent of inundated area on the mainstem Amazon by the late 21st century owing to influences of future climate change only.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86100", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86101" } }
{"authors":"Chuanyong Zhu::Beijing Normal University--Hezhong Tian::BNU Beijing Normal University--", "title":"A51B-0046: High resolution of anthropogenic atmospheric emissions of 12 heavy metals in the three biggest metropolitan areas, China", "abstract":"Atmospheric emissions of typical toxic heavy metals from anthropogenic sources have received worldwide concerns due to their adverse effects on human health and the ecosystem. An integrated inventory of anthropogenic emissions of twelve HMs (Hg, As, Se, Pb, Cd, Cr, Ni, Sb, Mn, Co, Cu and Zn) in the three biggest metropolitan areas, including Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei (BTH) region, Yangtze River Delta (YRD) region and Pearl River Delta (PRD) region, are developed for 1980–2012 by combining with detailed activity data and inter-annual dynamic emission factors which are determined by S-shaped curves on account of technology progress, economic development, and emission control. The results indicate total emissions of twelve HMs in the three metropolitan regions have increased from 5448.8 tons in 1980 to 19054.9 tons in 2012, with an annual average growth rate of about 4.0%. Due to significant difference in industrial structures and energy consumption compositions, remarkable distinctions can be observed with respect to source contributions of total HM emissions from above three metropolitan areas. Specifically, the ferrous metal smelting sector, coal combustion by industrial boilers and coal combustion by power plants are found to be the primary source of total HM emissions in the BTH region (about 34.2%), YRD region (about 28.2%) and PRD region (about 24.3%), respectively. Furthermore, we allocate the annual emissions of these heavy metals in 2012 at a high spatial resolution of 9 km × 9 km grid with ArcGIS methodology and surrogate indexes, such as regional population and gross domestic product (GDP). The peak of HM emissions are mainly distributed over the grid cells of Beijing, Tianjin, Tangshan, Shijiazhuang, Handan and Baoding in the BTH region; Shanghai, Suzhou, Wuxi, Nanjing, Hangzhou, Ningbo in the YRD region; Guangzhou, Shenzhen, Dongguan, Foshan in the PYD region, respectively. Additionally, monthly emission proﬁles are established in order to further identify the temporal emission characteristics of HMs. Key words: heavy metals (HMs), emission inventory, time-varying dynamic emission factor, temporal and spatial characteristics, Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei (BTH) region, Yangtze River Delta (YRD) region, Pearl River Delta (PRD) region, China", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86101", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86102" } }
{"authors":"Iwan Hermawan::Earth Observatory of Singapore--Ashar muda Lubis::Bengkulu University--Rio Sahputra::Bengkulu University--Emma Hill::Nanyang Technological University--Kerry Sieh::Nanyang Technological University--Lujia Feng::Earth Observatory of Singapore--Rino Salman::Earth Observatory of Singapore--Nugroho Hananto::Indonesian Institute of Sciences--", "title":"G13A-0998: Re-investigation of slip rate along the southern part of the Sumatran Fault Zone using SuMo GPS network", "abstract":"The Sumatran Fault Zone (SFZ) accommodates a significant component of the strike-slip motion of oblique convergence along the Sumatra subduction zone. Previous studies have suggested that the slip rates of the SFZ increase from south to north. However, recent work shows that the slip rates may not vary along the SFZ [Bradley et al., 2015]. New data are needed to help confirm these results, and to assess slip-rate variability and fault segmentation in more detail. This information is vital for seismic hazard assessment for the region. We have therefore installed and operated the SuMo (Sumatran Fault Monitoring) network, a dense GPS campaign network focused around the SFZ. From 2013-2015 we selected and installed 32 GPS monuments over the southern part of the SFZ. The network comprises of three transects. The first transect is around the location of the great 1900 earthquake, at the Musi segment. Two transects cover the Manna segment, which saw its last great earthquake in 1893, and the Kumering segment, which saw two great earthquakes in 1933 (M 7.5) and 1994 (M 7.0). We have now conducted three GPS campaign surveys for these stations (3-4 days of measurement for each occupation site), and established 5 semi-permanent cGPS stations in the area. The processed data show that the campaigns sites are still too premature to be used for estimating slip rates, but from the preliminary results for the semi-permanent stations we may see our first signal of deformation. More data from future survey campaigns will help us to estimated revised slip rates. In addition to the science goals for our project, we are this year starting a project called ` SuMo Goes to School,`  which will aim to disseminate information on our science to the schools that house the SuMo GPS stations. The SuMo project also achieves capacity building by training students from Bengkulu University in geodesy and campaign GPS survey techniques.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86102", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86103" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"B33E-0774: Quantifying the Impacts of Surface Albedo on Climate Using the WRF Model", "abstract":"Surface albedo is an important part of the energy budget in shaping local and regional climate. It could also be a potential tool to mitigate the anthropogenic effect on climate change. However, the current level of scientific understanding of surface albedo on global warming potential is medium to low. In order to investigate the anthropogenic impact of surface albedo on climate, different scenarios of urban surface albedo over continental US using the WRF model are simulated. In this study, the change in surface albedo applies to rooftops, pavements, and walls of urban land cover grid cells. The two groups of simulations (low and high albedo) were compared to determine the impacts of elevating urban surface albedo and to account for the uncertainty in the errors or noise introduced by the slightly different initial conditions. The results are represented as the differences in surface temperature and the top of the atmosphere radiation between the two scenarios when urban surface albedos are elevated from 0.15 to 0.40. The ensemble mean of all potential outcomes as a whole, instead of individual initial conditions, shows that the impact of elevating surface albedo has a cooling effect that is robust at both local and regional scales during the summer season. More refined analyses of urban areas will provide insights on surface albedo impacts in specific regions. Future analyses may address changes in CO2 equivalence.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86103", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86104" } }
{"authors":"Suresh Kumar Santhana Vannan::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Tammy Beaty::ORNL--Robert Cook::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Ranjeet Devarakonda::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Leslie Hook::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Yaxing Wei::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Daine Wright::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--", "title":"IN13A-1829: Agile based ` Semi-` Automated Data ingest process : ORNL DAAC example", "abstract":"The ORNL DAAC archives and publishes data and information relevant to biogeochemical, ecological, and environmental processes. The data archived at the ORNL DAAC must be well formatted, self-descriptive, and documented, as well as referenced in a peer-reviewed publication. The ORNL DAAC ingest team curates diverse data sets from multiple data providers simultaneously. To streamline the ingest process, the data set submission process at the ORNL DAAC has been recently updated to use an agile process and a semi-automated workflow system has been developed to provide a consistent data provider experience and to create a uniform data product. The goals of semi-automated agile ingest process are to: 1.Provide the ability to track a data set from acceptance to publication 2. Automate steps that can be automated to improve efficiencies and reduce redundancy 3.Update legacy ingest infrastructure 4.Provide a centralized system to manage the various aspects of ingest. This talk will cover the agile methodology, workflow, and tools developed through this system.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86104", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86105" } }
{"authors":"Laura Chasmer::University of Lethbridge--Chris Hopkinson::University of Lethbridge--", "title":"B51G-0518: ACCELERATING RATES OF DISCONTINUOUS PERMAFROST THAW ASSOCIATED WITH GROUND SURFACE MORPHOLOGY AND CHANGING VEGETATION STRUCTURES DETERMINED FROM MULTI-TEMPORAL LIDAR DATA", "abstract":"Rates of permafrost thaw within the discontinuous permafrost zone are expected to accelerate with permafrost fragmentation. However quantification of drivers of permafrost change remain elusive due to the non-linearity of feedbacks in space and time. Given the extent of permafrost in Canada, there is significant interest in the mechanisms associated with land cover change as climate change and disturbance intensifies. We quantify the variability of rates of thaw associated with structural characteristics of the land surface within a discontinuous permafrost watershed in the NWT, Canada. Results are compared to an isolated permafrost watershed in Alberta, which may exemplify the northern discontinuous landscape in ~350 years. Three airborne Light Detection And Ranging (LiDAR) datasets have been collected in 2008, 2011 and 2015, coincident with digital photogrammetry (2008), thermal infrared (2011) and bathymetry (2015) within both watersheds. Rates of change of land elevation associated with permafrost thaw within plateaus and peatlands are quantified using non-linear spatial regression, and compared with topographic and vegetation derivatives. Results indicate that increasing fragmentation of discontinuous permafrost plateaus results in exponential thaw. Rates of thaw become linear with decreasing complexity. Accelerating thaw is related to substantial Picea mariana mortality (up to 45%), increased gap fraction within 1-2 m of plateau edges, and shrub succession (average growth ~0.2 m yr—1) at the 0-2m boundary within the 7-year period. Thaw rate in parts is also complicated by understory succession within the area of local convexity between the plateau and slope edge and linear thaw pathways. Greatest rates of thaw and vegetation mortality (~30-50%) are found on plateaus with populous tremuloides. In the central boreal watershed, vegetation succession at peatland margins is associated with increased drying and changes to runoff trends over the last 40 years. Increased channelization of runoff along plateau and fen flow pathways combined with growth of short vascular vegetation may increase drying and promote rapid succession. A simple model indicates that the discontinuous permafrost zone could be similar to that of the central boreal forest in less than 300 years.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86105", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86106" } }
{"authors":"Ellen Petticrew::University of Northern British Columbia--Dominic Reiffarth::University of Northern British Columbia--Philip Owens::University of Northern British Columbia--David Lobb::University of Manitoba--", "title":"EP21C-0913: Challenges of Using Compound-Specific Stable Isotope Techniques in a Temperate Agricultural Watershed in Manitoba, Canada", "abstract":"Soil and sediment tracing using biomarkers–specifically fatty acids (FAs)–and their corresponding isotopic ratios, necessitates a unique isotopic signature for at least one of the FAs analyzed from the set of FAs from each source. The lack of a unique signature therefore results in an inability to distinguish the contribution of a particular source to a sediment mixture if all the FAs from each source exhibit identical or very similar isotopic values. Several factors may contribute to the variability (or lack thereof) in the isotopic values of individual FAs examine from differing sources. Samples from several sources in the South Tobacco Creek Watershed (STCW) in Manitoba, Canada, were collected during three sampling periods in each of 2012 and 2013 for a total of six sampling periods. The sampling design incorporated factors which were expected to affect the CSSI signal of the FAs within the same sampling period (e.g. spatial variability), throughout the growing season (temporal variability) and between seasons and crop rotations. Previous CSSI tracing attempts have used total organic carbon (TOC) and a sample’s corresponding soil bulk carbon isotope value (13Cbulk) as part of the calculation for soil apportioning i.e. determining the contribution from unique sources to a particular sediment mixture sample. Samples from the STCW were analyzed for TOC and 13Cbulk values for the sampling periods mentioned above to determine spatial and temporal variability. Some of the CSSI data for FAs used as potential tracers is also presented. The suitability of using TOC and 13Cbulk values in contrast to CSSI values and complementary quantitative data for soil apportioning and tracing is discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86106", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86107" } }
{"authors":"Rongcai Ren::Institute of Atmospheric Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Yueyue Yu::Institute of Atmospheric Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Ming Cai::Florida State University--", "title":"A51H-0155: An effective indicator of continental scale cold air outbreaks in northern winter: the intensity variation of the meridional mass circulation", "abstract":"This study reports that the intensity variation of the meridional mass circulation can be an effective leading indicator of cold air outbreaks (CAOs) over midlatitudes in northern winter. It is found that continental-scale coldness by cold air outbreaks (CAOs) tend to preferentially occur within a week after stronger mass circulation events defined as the peak time when the net mass transport across 60°N in the upper warm or the lower cold air branch exceeds ~88×109 kg s-1. During weaker mass circulation events when the net mass transport across 60°N is below ~71.6×109 kg s-1, most areas of the mid-latitudes are generally in mild condition except the northern part of Western Europe. Composite pattern of circulation anomalies during stronger mass circulation events greatly resemble that of the winter-mean, with the two main routes of anomalous cold air outbreaks being along the climatological routes of polar cold air, namely, via East Asia and North America. The Siberian High shifts westward during stronger mass circulation events, opening up a third route of cold air outbreaks through Eastern Europe. The relationship of CAOs with Arctic Oscillation (AO) is less robust because temporal changes of AO are resulted from a small imbalance between the poleward and equatorward branches of the mass circulation. Only when the poleward branch leads the equatorward branch (44% of all cases), CAOs tend to take place within a week after a negative phase of AO. The daily ERA-Interim reanalysis data set for the 32 winters in 1979–2011 were used in this study.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86107", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86108" } }
{"authors":"Donna Charlevoix::UNAVCO, Inc. Boulder--Aisha Morris::UNAVCO, Inc. Boulder--", "title":"ED13G-03: Developing Research-Ready Skills: Preparing Early Academic Students for Participation in Research Experiences", "abstract":"Engaging lower-division undergraduates in research experiences is a key but challenging aspect of guiding talented students into the geoscience research pipeline. UNAVCO conducted a summer internship program to prepare first and second year college students for participation in authentic, scientific research. Many students in their first two years of academic studies do not have the science content knowledge or sufficient math skills to conduct independent research. Students from groups historically underrepresented in the geosciences may face additional challenges in that they often have a less robust support structure to help them navigate the university environment and may be less aware of professional opportunities in the geosciences. UNAVCO, manager of NSF’s geodetic facility, hosted four students during summer 2015 internship experience aimed to help them develop skills that will prepare them for research internships and skills that will help them advance professionally. Students spent eight weeks working with UNAVCO technical staff learning how to use equipment, prepare instrumentation for field campaigns, among other technical skills. Interns also participated in a suite of professional development activities including communications workshops, skills seminars, career circles, geology-focused field trips, and informal interactions with research interns and graduate student interns at UNAVCO. This presentation will outline the successes and challenges of engaging students early in their academic careers and outline the unique role such experiences can have in students’ academic careers.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86108", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86109" } }
{"authors":"Brandon McElroy::University of Wyoming--Robert Mahon::University of Wyoming--Thomas Ashley::University of Wyoming--Jason Alexander::University of Wyoming--", "title":"EP13C-07: Scaling of sand flux over bedforms- experiments to field scale", "abstract":"Bed forms are one of the few geomorphic phenomena whose field and laboratory geometric scales have significant overlap. This is similarly true for scales of sediment transport. Whether in the lab or field, at low transport stages and high Rouse numbers where suspension is minimal, sand fluxes scale nonlinearly with transport stage. At high transport stages, and low Rouse numbers where suspension is substantial, sand transport scales with rouse number. In intermediate cases deformation of bed forms is a direct result of the exchange of sediment between the classically suspended and bed load volumes. These parameters are straightforwardly measured in the laboratory. However, practical difficulties and cost ineffectiveness often exclude bed-sediment measurements from studies and monitoring efforts aimed at estimating sediment loads in rivers. An alternative to direct sampling is through the measurement of evolution of bed topography constrained by sediment-mass conservation. Historically, the topographic-evolution approach has been limited to systems with negligible transport of sand in suspension. As was shown decades ago, pure bed load transport is responsible for the mean migration of trains of bed forms when no sediment is exchanged between individual bed forms. In contrast, the component of bed-material load that moves in suspension is responsible for changes in the size, shape, and spacing of evolving bed forms; collectively this is called deformation. The difference between bed-load flux and bed-material-load flux equals the flux of suspended bed material. We give a partial demonstration of this using available field and laboratory data and comparing them across geometric and sediment transport scales.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86109", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86110" } }
{"authors":"Christopher Wong::University of Toronto--Muhammad Altaf Arain::McMaster University--Ingo Ensminger::University of Toronto--", "title":"B43D-0599: Monitoring Spring Recovery of Photosynthesis and Spectral Reflectance in Temperate Evergreen and Mixed Deciduous Forests", "abstract":"Evergreen conifers in boreal and temperate regions undergo strong seasonal changes in photoperiod and temperatures, which characterizes their photosynthetic activity with high activity in the growing season and downregulation during the winter season. Monitoring the timing of the transitions in evergreens is difficult since it’s a largely invisible process, unlike deciduous trees that have a visible budding and senescence sequence. Spectral reflectance and the photochemical reflectance index (PRI), often used as a proxy for photosynthetic light-use efficiency, provides a promising tool to track the transition of evergreens between inactive and active photosynthetic states. To better understand the relationship between PRI and photosynthetic activity and to contrast this relationship between plant functional types, the spring recovery of an evergreen forest and mixed deciduous forest was monitored using spectral reflectance, chlorophyll fluorescence and gas exchange. All metrics indicate photosynthetic recovery during the spring season. These findings indicate that PRI can be used to observe the spring recovery of photosynthesis in evergreen conifers but may not be best suited for deciduous trees. These findings have implications for remote sensing, which provides a promising long-term monitoring system of whole ecosystems, which is important since their roles in the carbon cycle may shift in response to climate change.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86110", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86111" } }
{"authors":"Jane Walden::Seattle University--John Lauer::Seattle University--Kathryn De Rego::University of British Columbia--Marwan Hassan::University of British Columbia--", "title":"EP33A-1028: Influence of Dams on Size-Specific Sediment Transport and Storage on the Elwha River, Washington", "abstract":"The Elwha River recently underwent the largest dam removal project in history with the deconstruction of the Elwha and Glines Canyon Dams. According to recent USGS and USBR estimates, the project released 21±3 million m3 of sediment, approximately 420,000 m3 of which was gravel and cobble. Much of the coarse sediment released from the reservoir deposits has been stored in the channel bed and floodplain. Our project focuses on the gravel and cobble sediment budget for the middle and lower Elwha Rivers for pre- and post-removal periods. Prior to removal, the reduction in sediment load caused by the dams likely led to coarsening and incision despite regular lateral channel change, with the floodplain representing an important source of bed material. Air photo analysis (1939–2015) and creation of a map of relative floodplain elevation (topographic surface minus elevation of nearby vegetation line) helped test the hypothesis that post-dam (but pre-removal) floodplain deposits were built to a lower elevation than pre-dam surfaces. Preliminary results indicate that pre-removal but post-dam banks are, on average, lower than older banks, suggesting that floodplain built during the period when dams were in place did not completely replace sediment eroded from nearby banks. Bank erosion thus almost certainly represented a net source of sediment for the channel, and differences in the size distributions of eroded and deposited material could have had important geomorphic implications. Facies mapping and surface and sub-surface sampling on recent bars and along cut banks allow us to compare the coarseness of pre- and post-dam bulk deposits. We note that the coarsest fraction in eroding banks may be correlated to riffle location. In addition, bulk sampling in recently exposed reservoir deposits allows us to estimate the gravel and cobble fractions of the pulse of sediment released to the downstream river after the final portion of Glines Canyon Dam was removed in August 2014.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86111", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86112" } }
{"authors":"Bernadette Placky::Climate Central--Todd Sanford::Climate Central--", "title":"ED32A-07: Climate Matters: Increasing Climate Literacy Through Broadcast Meteorologists", "abstract":"Broadcast meteorologists are among the most trusted members of the media landscape and they have a unique opportunity to reach the broad public with information about climate change. A recent survey by Maibach, et al. (2015) has shown that more than 90% of TV weathercasters think that their audience is at least somewhat interested in learning about the local impacts of climate change and 7 in 10 think that it is appropriate for them to report the science of climate change to their audience. But about half of these TV weathercasters have experienced obstacles to reporting climate change – citing lack of time to research and produce material, in addition to lack of access to appropriate visuals/graphics and access to trusted scientific information. Climate Matters is an NSF funded program that partners with broadcast meteorologists to deliver scientifically sound climate change information to the public that is local and relevant. A team of climate scientists, meteorologists, data analysts, journalists, and multimedia artists analyze and prepare content on a weekly basis so that it may be readily included in a broadcast weather segment, online or during community outreach. The program started as a pilot project with just one meteorologist in 2010 before Climate Central launched a full-time, nationwide program in 2012. Since then, Climate Matters has grown to include over 250 meteorologists strong and in more than 100 markets across the country, including Spanish language TV stations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86112", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86113" } }
{"authors":"John Woods::Stinger Ghaffarian Technologies--Jefferson Beck::Universities Space Research Association Greenbelt--Sarah Bartholow::ARCUS--", "title":"ED43C-0882: IceBridge: Bringing a Field Campaign Home", "abstract":"IceBridge, a six-year NASA mission, is the largest airborne survey of Earth's polar ice ever flown. It will yield an unprecedented three-dimensional view of Arctic and Antarctic ice sheets, ice shelves and sea ice. These flights will provide a yearly, multi-instrument look at the behavior of the rapidly changing features of the Greenland and Antarctic ice. Data collected during IceBridge will help scientists bridge the gap in polar observations between NASA's Ice, Cloud and Land Elevation Satellite (ICESat) -- in orbit since 2003 -- and ICESat-2, planned for 2017. ICESat stopped collecting science data in 2009, making IceBridge critical for ensuring a continuous series of observations. IceBridge will use airborne instruments to map Arctic and Antarctic areas once a year at a minimum, with new campaigns being developed during the Arctic melt season. IceBridge flights are conducted in the spring and summer for the Arctic and in the fall over Antarctica. Other smaller airborne surveys around the world are also part of the IceBridge campaign. IceBridge actively engages the public and educators through a variety of outlets ranging from communications strategies through social media outlets, to larger organized efforts such as PolarTREC. In field activities include blog posts, photo updates, in flight chat sessions, and more intensive live events to include google hangouts, where field team members can interact with the public during a scheduled broadcast. The IceBridge team provides scientists and other team members with the training and support to become communicators in their own right. There is an exciting new initiative where IceBridge will be collaborating with Undergraduate and Graduate students to integrate the next generation of scientists and communicators into the Science Teams. This will be explored through partnerships with institutions that are interested in mentoring through project based initiatives.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86113", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86114" } }
{"authors":"Ali Moradi::Colorado School of Mines--", "title":"H23I-03: Pore scale Assessment of Heat and Mass transfer in Porous Medium Using Phase Field Method with Application to Soil Borehole Thermal Storage (SBTES) Systems", "abstract":"To properly model soil thermal performance in unsaturated porous media, for applications such as SBTES systems, knowledge of both soil hydraulic and thermal properties and how they change in space and time is needed. Knowledge obtained from pore scale to macroscopic scale studies can help us to better understand these systems and contribute to the state of knowledge which can then be translated to engineering applications in the field (i.e. implementation of SBTES systems at the field scale). One important thermal property that varies with soil water content, effective thermal conductivity, is oftentimes included in numerical models through the use of empirical relationships and simplified mathematical formulations developed based on experimental data obtained at either small laboratory or field scales. These models assume that there is local thermodynamic equilibrium between the air and water phases for a representative elementary volume. However, this assumption may not always be valid at the pore scale, thus questioning the validity of current modeling approaches. The purpose of this work is to evaluate the validity of the local thermodynamic equilibrium assumption as related to the effective thermal conductivity at pore scale. A numerical model based on the coupled Cahn–Hilliard and heat transfer equation was developed to solve for liquid flow and heat transfer through variably saturated porous media. In this model, the evolution of phases and the interfaces between phases are related to a functional form of the total free energy of the system. A unique solution for the system is obtained by solving the Navier-Stokes equation through free energy minimization. Preliminary results demonstrate that there is a correlation between soil temperature / degree of saturation and equivalent thermal conductivity / heat flux. Results also confirm the correlation between pressure differential magnitude and equilibrium time for multiphase flow to reach steady state conditions. Based on these results, the equivalent time for steady-state heat transfer is much larger than the equivalent time for steady-state multiphase flow for a given pressure differential. Moreover, the wetting phase flow and consequently heat transfer appear to be sensitive to contact angle and porosity of the domain.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86114", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86115" } }
{"authors":"Tullia Upton::Oregon State University--", "title":"GP51A-1321: Magnetic Measurements and Heavy Metal Concentrations at Formosa Mine Superfund Site, Douglas County, OR", "abstract":"Advances in the field of environmental magnetism have led to exciting new applications for this field. Magnetic minerals are ubiquitous in the environment and tend to have an affinity for heavy metals. It has been demonstrated that magnetic properties are often significantly related to concentrations of heavy metals and/or pollution loading index (PLI). As a result, magnetic techniques have been used as proxy for determining hot spots of several types of pollution produced from a diversity of anthropogenic sources. Magnetic measurements are non-destructive and relatively inexpensive compared to geochemical analyses. The utility of environmental magnetic methods varies widely depending on biological, chemical and physical processes that create and transform soils and sediments. Applications in the direction of mapping heavy metals have been studied and shown to be quite useful in countries such as China and India but to date, little research has been done in the US. As such, there is need to expand the scope of research to a wider range of soil types and land uses, especially within the US. This study investigates the application of environmental magnetic techniques to mapping of heavy metal concentrations and PLI at the Formosa Mine Superfund Site, an abandoned mine about 25 miles southwest of Roseburg, OR. Using hotspot analysis, correlation and cluster analyses, interactions between metals and magnetic parameters are examined in relation to environmental factors such as proximity to seeps and adits. Preliminary results suggest significant correlation of magnetic susceptibility with certain heavy metals, signifying that magnetic methods may be useful in mapping heavy metal hotspots at this site.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86115", "section":"Geomagnetism and Paleomagnetism"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86116" } }
{"authors":"Yingchen Li::CNU Capital Nornal University--Yinghai Ke::CNU Capital Nornal University--Huili Gong::CNU Capital Nornal University--Yun Pan::Capital Normal University--Lin Zhu::CNU Capital Nornal University--Beibei Chen::CNU Capital Nornal University--", "title":"G21A-1017: Spatial-temporal heterogeneity of land subsidence evolution in Beijing based on InSAR and cluster analysis", "abstract":"Land subsidence is a common natural hazard occurring in extensive areas in the world. In Beijing, the capital city of China, there has been serious land subsidence due to overexploitation of ground water during the recent decades. Five major subsidence tunnels have formed. Across the Beijing plain area, the ground is sinking at the rate of 30-100mm/year. Uneven subsidence leads to ground fissure and building destruction, and has caused great economical and property loss. To better characterize and understand regional land subsidence evolution, it is critical to monitor the time-series dynamics of subsidence, and capture the spatial-temporal heterogeneity of the subsidence evolution. Interferometric SAR technique, as it provides high spatial resolution and wide range of observation, have been successfully used to monitor regional ground deformation. The objective of this study is to derive time-series regional land subsidence dynamics in Beijing, and based on which, analyze and assess the spatial-temporal heterogeneity of the evolution using cluster analysis. First, ENVISAT ASAR (2003-2009 years, 28 scenes, track number: 218) datasets during 2003-2010 covering Beijing plain area were utilized to obtain time-series subsidence rate using Persistent Scatter InSAR (PS-InSAR) technique provided in SARProz software. Second, time-series subsidence characteristics of the PS points were analyzed and the PS points were clustered based on Self-Organization feature Maps (SOM) algorithm considering environmental factors such as groundwater level and lithologic characters. This study demonstrates that based on InSAR measurements and SOMs algorithm, the spatial-temporal heterogeneity of land subsidence evolution can be captured. Each cluster shows unique spatial-temporal evolution pattern. The results of this study will facilitate further land subsidence modeling and prediction at regional spatial scale.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86116", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86117" } }
{"authors":"M. Bryson Brown::University of Lethbridge--Kent Peacock::University of Lethbridge--", "title":"GC33A-1256: Climate Action and Activism: Scientists as Citizens and Communicators", "abstract":"Humans are not particularly good at being rational, either individually or socially; in the case of climate change, our concerns are chiefly social.  The denial of climate change and its costs (ranging from denial of basic principles to using high discount rates to reduce the current value of future losses, and supported by fossil fuel companies and their many political allies) has delayed an effective response to a problem that gets worse and more costly the longer action is delayed. The central role of fossil fuels in our economies and of fossil fuel interests in our politics leads many to worry about the costs of change while denying or ignoring the costs of business as usual. Rational decision makers would not be so selective, either about the evidence or about the costs and benefits that hang in the balance. Effective communication can help call attention to the evidence and to the costs and benefits that have been neglected.  Our society has no formal rules requiring scientists to become activists, even when the results of their work provide sound reasons for taking action. But ideals of citizenship and humanitarianism provide strong justification for those who choose to engage with the issues. A reticent scientist might feel that her job is done once the results of her research are published. The rest is arguably the responsibility of others—of politicians, journalists and citizens in general, to learn the relevant facts (now available as part of the published literature) and to bring those facts to bear in decisions ranging from the personal to the political and economic. But I urge scientists who feel this way to reconsider—not because their view of where the real responsibility lies is wrong, but because they are in a position to make a difference. In situations like these, where powerful interests are threatened by inconvenient facts, scientists can be very effective communicators: they have high credibility with the public (as deniers' repeated claims to scientific authority ironically confirms), and those who do take on the public role of communicating science can help to counter the propaganda and distortions of science deniers.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86117", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86118" } }
{"authors":"Andrea Sealy::Caribbean Institute for Meteorology and Hydrology--Ashford Reyes::Caribbean Institute for Meteorology and Hydrology--David Farrell::Caribbean Institute for Meteorology and Hydrology--", "title":"A23C-0334: Dust and Air Quality Forecasting in the Eastern Caribbean", "abstract":"Significant amounts of dust travel across the northern tropical Atlantic to the Caribbean every year from the Sahara region. These dust concentrations in the Caribbean often exceed United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) standards for particulate matter of 2.5 microns or less (PM 2.5) which could have serious implications for human health in the region. Air pollution has become a major issue in the Caribbean because of urban development, increased vehicle emissions and growing industrialisation. However, the majority of territories in the Caribbean do not have routine air quality monitoring programmes and several do not have or enforce air quality standards for PM2.5 and PM10. As a result, the Caribbean Institute for Meteorology and Hydrology (CIMH) has taken the initiative to provide dust and air quality forecasts for the Eastern Caribbean using the advanced WRF-Chem modeling system. The applications of the WRF-Chem modelling system at CIMH that are currently being focused on are the coupled weather prediction/dispersion model to simulate the release and transport of constituents, especially Saharan dust transport and concentration; and as a coupled weather/dispersion/air quality model with full interaction of chemical species with prediction of particulate matter (PM2.5 and PM10). This will include future applications in the prediction of ozone (O3) and ultraviolet (UV) radiation as well as examining dust radiative forcing and effects on atmospheric precipitation and dynamics. The simulations are currently initialised at 00Z for a seven day forecast and run at 36 km resolution with a planned second domain (at 12 km) for air quality forecasts. Preliminary results from this study will be presented and compared to other dust forecast models currently used in other regions. This work also complements in situ measurements at Ragged Point, Barbados (oldest dust record since 1965), Martinique, Guadeloupe, French Guiana and Puerto Rico. The goal of this study is to develop a health warning system for the developing countries of the Eastern Caribbean in order to mitigate against adverse health effects by persons most vulnerable.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86118", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86119" } }
{"authors":"K. Kritee::Environmental Defense Fund Boulder--Richie Ahuja::Environmental Defense Fund Boulder--Drishya Nair::Fair Climate Network--Tashina Esteves::Fair Climate Network--Joe Rudek::Environmental Defense Fund New York--Tran Thu Ha::Environmental Defense Fund--", "title":"GC12C-05: Identifying, monitoring and implementing “sustainable” agricultural practices for smallholder farmers over large geographic areas in India and Vietnam", "abstract":"Industrial agriculture systems, mostly in developed and some emerging economies, are far different from the small-holder farms (size <1 acre) in Asia and Africa. Along with our partners from non-governmental, corporate, academic and government sectors and tens of thousands of farming families, we have worked actively in five states in India and two provinces in Vietnam for the last five years to understand how sustainable and climate smart farming practices can be monitored at small-holder farms. Here, any approach to monitor farming must begin by accounting for the tremendous management variability from farm to farm and also the current inability to ground-truth remote sensing data due to lack of relaible basic parameters (e.g., yields, N use, farm boundaries) which are necessary for calibrating empirical/biogeochemical models. While we continue to learn from new research, we have found that it is crucial to follow some steps if sustainable farming programs are to succeed at small-holder farms Demographic data collection and GPS plot demarcation to establish farm size and ownership Baseline nutrient, water & energy use and crop yield determination via surveys and self-reporting which are verifiable through farmer networks given the importance of peer to peer learning in the dissemination of new techniques in such landscapes “Sustainable” practice determination in consultation with local universities/NGO experts Measurements on representative plots for 3-4 years to help calibrate biogeochemical models and/or empirical equations and establish which practices are truly “sustainable” (e.g., GHG emission reduction varies from 0-7 tCO2e/acre for different sustainable practices). Propagation of sustainable practices across the landscape via local NGOs/governments after analyzing the replicability of identified farming practices in the light of local financial, cultural or socio-political barriers.  We will present results from representative plots (including soil and weather parameters, GHG emissions, yields, inputs, economic and environmental savings), farmer surveys and diary data; and discuss our key conclusions based on our approach and the analysis of the collected data which was enabled by use of a commercially available comprehensive agricultural data collection software.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86119", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86120" } }
{"authors":"Laura Rademacher::University of the Pacific--Kristina Faul::Mills College--", "title":"H21J-1545: An Analysis of the Effectiveness of Various Management Strategies of Small Urban Reservoirs for Improving Water Quality", "abstract":"Small urban reservoirs, some more than 100 years old, are scattered throughout the San Francisco Bay (SFB) area. Because of the small size of these reservoirs, many of them are locally managed and provide an opportunity to investigate various management strategies on in-lake and downstream water quality. We studied three small, urban reservoir-watershed systems in the SFB subjected to differing water quality impairments to determine which management strategies might be most effective for improving water quality. The three study reservoir-watershed systems were monitored biweekly for water quality at the reservoir inlets and outlets and in the lakes through surface to bottom depth profiles. Measurements included pH, conductivity, dissolved oxygen, temperature, nutrients, and metal concentrations. In addition, sediment cores were collected and analyzed for metal and nutrient concentrations, with chronologies assigned based on Pb-210 and Cs-137 data. One watershed-reservoir system is managed with the reservoir cyclically empty (during winter months) and full (during summer months), whereas the other two watershed-reservoir systems are managed with the reservoir always full, albeit to varying levels. Results indicate the ideal management strategy depends upon the primary pollutant of interest and may not be the same in all urban reservoir-watershed systems. However, overall water quality may generally be improved with continuously full reservoirs with occasional, controlled drawdown. Continuing experiments are investigating the role of microbes in pollutant cycling in these reservoirs it their relation to reservoir full versus reservoir cyclically empty management strategies.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86120", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86121" } }
{"authors":"Cecilia Leung::University of Arizona--Scot Rafkin::Southwest Research Institute Boulder--Alfred McEwen::University of Arizona--", "title":"P22A-05: Mesoscale Modeling of Water Vapor and Dust in Valles Marineris: Atmospheric Influences on Recurring Slope Lineae.", "abstract":"Extensive recurring slope lineae (RSL) activity has been detected in Valles Marineris on Mars and coincides with regions where water ice fogs appear [1]. The origin of the water driving RSL flow is not well understood, but observational evidence suggests atmospheric processes play a crucial role [2]. Provided the atmospheric vapor concentration is high enough, water ice fogs can form overnight if the surface temperature cools below the condensation temperature. Correlations between dust storms and flow rates suggest that atmospheric dust opacity, and its influence on air temperature, also has a significant effect on RSL activity. We investigate planetary boundary layer processes that govern the hydrological cycle and dust cycle on Mars using a mesoscale atmospheric model to simulate the distribution of water and dust with respect to regional atmospheric circulations. Our simulations in Valles Marineris show a curious temperature structure, where the inside of the canyon appears warmer relative to the plateaus immediately outside. For a well-mixed atmosphere, this temperature structure indicates that when the atmosphere inside the canyon is saturated and fog is present within Valles Marineris, fog and low-lying clouds should also be present on the cooler surrounding plateaus as well. However, images taken with the Mars Express High Resolution Stereo Camera (HRSC) show instances where water ice fog appeared exclusively inside the canyon. These results have important implications for the origin and concentration of water vapor in Valles Marineris, with possible connections to RSL. The potential temperatures from our simulations show a high level of stability inside the canyon produced dynamically by sinking air. However, afternoon updrafts along the canyon walls indicate that over time, water vapor within the chasm would escape along the sides of the canyon. Again, this suggests a local source or mechanism to concentrate water vapor is needed to explain the fog phenomenon appearing within the confines of the canyon in Valles Marineris. [1] Möhlmann et al. (2009) Planet Space Sci. 57, 1987-1992. [2] McEwen et al. (2015) EPSC abstract. Vol. 10, 786-1.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86121", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86123" } }
{"authors":"Laurent Mingo::Blue System Integration Ltd.--Gwenn Flowers::Simon Fraser University--David Saint-Jacques::Canadian Space Agency--", "title":"C43B-0804: Design and deployment of a stationary ice-penetrating radar system", "abstract":"Ice-penetrating radar (IPR) is a popular tool in glaciology, used most commonly for mapping ice depth. Dielectric contrasts between englacial materials, including ice, water, and impurities, allow the detection of internal stratigraphy and some characterization of englacial properties. Here we describe the design and the 2014-2015 deployments of an autonomous stationary ice-penetrating radar system that was tested on a large outlet glacier of the Icefield Ranges of southwest Yukon, Canada. The radar system was deployed within a kilometer of an ice-marginal lake that is dammed by the Kaskawulsh Glacier and drains annually in a subglacial jökulhlaup. It was programmed to perform a series of soundings every few hours and was left unattended over the course of 6 weeks in 2014 and 7 weeks in 2015, while the lake level was monitored with a pressure transducer and time-lapse imagery. The 2014 dataset is characterized by a marked decrease in englacial reflector strength and coherence during the drainage of the ice-dammed lake. We interpret these data as a significant change in englacial saturation associated with the flood. The 2015 dataset post-dates the flood and provides an opportunity to examine more subtle changes in englacial and subglacial properties. Radar mapping in the vicinity of the deployment locations provides context for the time-dependent measurements, also showing significant differences before and after lake drainage.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86123", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86124" } }
{"authors":"Nadja Insel::Northeastern Illinois University--Shiyu Lee::Research Center for Environmental Changes Academia Sinica--", "title":"T33A-2927: Temporal and Spatial Evolution of Precipitation in Response to the Growth of Taiwan Topography", "abstract":"Taiwan is known as one of the best field areas to study the interactions between tectonics, climate and surface processes. One of the main feedback components is the tendency of topography to increase orographically localized precipitation, but it is unclear how climate may have changed over time as Taiwan topography developed. We present results from two regional general circulation models (RegCM4, REMO) to evaluate dynamical and physical atmospheric changes associated with variations in the height of the Taiwanese Central Range. A series of experiments are conducted with topography systematically varying between 0 and 100% of the modern. To best reproduce the Taiwanese topography, our experiments are performed with a horizontal resolution of 10-20km. Our current simulations focus on the understanding of the temporal and spatial evolution of climate in response to surface uplift. Our first objective is to assess the ability of the regional models to simulate modern climate over Taiwan. An initial comparison between simulated and observed data indicates that the limited-domain models perform very well in capturing the spatial precipitation pattern over Taiwan. Simulated high precipitation occurs along the Central Range with maximum annual precipitation in the northeast. Decreasing precipitation rates towards to west and southwest can be observed in model and observational data. Models with spatial resolutions of 50km or more are not capable to reproduce the observed pattern. Our second objective is to investigate the effect of Pliocene growth of the Central Range on regional climate over Taiwan. Preliminary model results indicate that precipitation over Taiwan strongly correlates with topography. Reducing the topography in our model domain results in a significant decrease in precipitation across the entire island. Our goal is to evaluate the climate sensitivity to a range of mountain topographies and quantify threshold elevations needed to induce the modern precipitation magnitudes and pattern over Taiwan. Thus, we provide specific predictions of elevation, precipitation and other climate parameters that can be directly compared with paleoclimate and paleoaltimetry proxies from Taiwan.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86124", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86125" } }
{"authors":"Megan Carter::Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory--Kerstin Lehnert::Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory--", "title":"IN21B-1688: The Internet of Samples in the Earth Sciences (iSamples)", "abstract":"Across most Earth Science disciplines, research depends on the availability of samples collected above, at, and beneath Earth’s surface, on the moon and in space, or generated in experiments. Many domains in the Earth Sciences have recently expressed the need for better discovery, access, and sharing of scientific samples and collections (EarthCube End-User Domain workshops, 2012 and 2013, http://earthcube.org/info/about/end-user-workshops), as has the US government (OSTP Memo, March 2014). The Internet of Samples in the Earth Sciences (iSamples) is an initiative funded as a Research Coordination Network (RCN) within the EarthCube program to address this need. iSamples aims to advance the use of innovative cyberinfrastructure to connect physical samples and sample collections across the Earth Sciences with digital data infrastructures to revolutionize their utility for science. iSamples strives to build, grow, and foster a new community of practice, in which domain scientists, curators of sample repositories and collections, computer and information scientists, software developers and technology innovators engage in and collaborate on defining, articulating, and addressing the needs and challenges of physical samples as a critical component of digital data infrastructure. A primary goal of iSamples is to deliver a community-endorsed set of best practices and standards for the registration, description, identification, and citation of physical specimens and define an actionable plan for implementation. iSamples conducted a broad community survey about sample sharing and has created 5 different working groups to address the different challenges of developing the internet of samples – from metadata schemas and unique identifiers to an architecture of a shared cyberinfrastructure for collections, to digitization of existing collections, to education, and ultimately to establishing the physical infrastructure that will ensure preservation and access of the physical samples. Creating awareness of the need to include physical samples in discussions of reproducible science is another priority of the iSamples RCN.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86125", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86126" } }
{"authors":"Feng Shi::Institute of Geology and Geophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Quansheng Ge::Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Bao Yang::Cold and Arid Regions Environmental and Engineering Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Jianping Li::Beijing Normal University--Fengmei Yang::China Meteorological Administration Training Centre--Fredrik Ljungqvist::Department of History, Stockholm University--Olga Solomina::Institute of Geography, Russian Academy of Sciences--Takeshi Nakatsuka::Nagoya University--Ninglian Wang::CAREERI/CAS Cold and Arid Regions Environmental and Engineering Research Institute--Sen Zhao::IAP Insititute of Atmospheric Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Chenxi Xu::Research Institute for Humanity and Nature--Keyan Fang::Key Laboratory of Humid Subtropical Eco-Geographical Process (Ministry of Education), Fujian Normal University--Zexin Fan::Xishuangbanna Tropical Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Narayan Prasad Gaire::Faculty of Science, Nepal Academy of Science and Technology, Khumaltar--Muhammad Zafar::Laboratory of Dendrochronology and Plant Ecology, Federal Urdu University, Gulshan-e-Iqbal Campus--", "title":"PP51A-2283: A Multi-proxy Reconstruction of Spatial and Temporal Variations in Asian Summer Temperatures Over the Last Millennium", "abstract":"To investigate climate variability in Asia during the last millennium, the spatial and temporal evolution of summer (June–July–August; JJA) temperature in eastern and south-central Asia is reconstructed using multi-proxy records and the regularized expectation maximization (RegEM) algorithm with truncated total least squares (TTLS), under a point-by-point regression (PPR) framework. The temperature index reconstructions show that the late 20th century was the warmest period in Asia over the past millennium. The temperature field reconstructions illustrate that temperatures in central, eastern, and southern China during the 11th and 13th centuries, and in western Asia during the 12th century, were significantly higher than those in other regions, and comparable to levels in the 20th century. Except for the most recent warming, all identified warm events showed distinct regional expressions and none were uniform over the entire reconstruction area. The main finding of the study is that spatial temperature patterns have, on centennial timescales, varied greatly over the last millennium. Moreover, seven climate model simulations, from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5), over the same region of Asia, are all consistent with the temperature index reconstruction at the 99 % confidence level. Only spatial temperature patterns extracted as the first empirical orthogonal function (EOF) from the GISS-E2-R and MPI-ESM-P model simulations are significant and consistent with the temperature field reconstruction over the past millennium in Asia at the 90 % confidence level. This indicates that both the reconstruction and the simulations depict the temporal climate variability well over the past millennium. However, the spatial simulation or reconstruction capability of climate variability over the past millennium could be still limited. For reconstruction, some grid points do not pass validation tests and reveal the need for more proxies with high temporal resolution, accurate dating, and sensitive temperature signals, especially in central Asia and before AD 1400.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86126", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86128" } }
{"authors":"Alexander Morgan::University of Virginia Main Campus--Alan Howard::University of Virginia Main Campus--Jeffrey Moore::NASA Ames Research Center--", "title":"P44B-03: Constraints on Environmental Conditions on Mars during Periods of Alluvial Fan Formation: Results from Landform Evolution Modeling", "abstract":"As depositional systems forming within enclosed crater basins, the Late Noachian and Hesperian –aged [1] alluvial fans on Mars (including the Peace Vallis fan in Gale crater) may be representative of the last vestiges of widespread fluvial activity on the planet’s surface, an era during which the climate transitioned from a wetter early Mars to the cold and dry planet we observe today. We have constructed a landform evolution model that combines sediment transport with channel avulsion to study the evolution of a fan-forming channel network over timescales of decades to hundreds of thousands of years. We aim to address two related questions: (1) what were the characteristics of water discharge (flow magnitude and duration); and (2) what are the associated implications for the responsible climatic environment (e.g. amount and frequency of precipitation sourcing the fans). The model uses a cellular network with a grid spacing set equal to the channel width. Two end-members of sediment are transported through the channel network: gravel bedload and fine grained material that is deposited overbank as a function of distance and elevation difference from an active channel. Overbank deposition creates channel levees, which must be overtopped for the channel to undergo an avulsion. By recording the relative amounts of bedload and overbank deposition, the 3-D stratigraphy is recorded as the fan is constructed. Using measures such as channel width, relative proportions of channel versus overbank deposited sediment, and frequency of channel branching, output is statistically compared with digital elevation models that we been produced from high-resolution CTX and HiRISE stereo pairs. Our modeling suggests that the fans formed from many flow events over many thousands of years, in agreement with estimations based on geomorphological observations by [2]. We are continuing to refine the model to test for varying patterns of precipitation, duricrusts, and limits on sediment supply in the source basin catchments. [1] Grant, J.A., Wilson, S.A., 2011. Late alluvial fan formation in southern Margaritifer Terra, Mars. Geophys. Res. Lett. 38 [3] Morgan, A.M., et al., 2014. Sedimentology and climatic environment of alluvial Fans in the martian Saheki crater and a comparison with terrestrial fans in the Atacama Desert. Icarus 229", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86128", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86129" } }
{"authors":"Chad Carlson::University of Nevada Reno--James Faulds::Univ Nevada Reno--", "title":"GP31A-1365: Reference Directions, Rotations, and Magnetostratigraphy: Utilization of Oligocene Ignimbrite Paleomagnetism to Better Understand Walker Lane Tectonics, Western Nevada, USA", "abstract":"The Walker Lane accommodates ~20% of dextral strain between the Pacific and North American Plates on discontinuous sets of predominately northwest-striking right- and easterly striking left-lateral faults. Located west of dextral faults of the central Walker Lane and east of the Sierra Nevada frontal fault system is a region of normal faults and asymmetric basins where geodetic studies define ~5 mm/yr of northwest-directed dextral strain. As this region is devoid of major strike-slip fault systems, how strain is accommodated is poorly understood. To elucidate the long-term tectonic development of this region, we are compiling paleomagnetic data from late Oligocene ash-flow tuffs to determine magnitudes of vertical-axis rotation. This data set will be compared with ongoing and complementary studies of subsurface basin geometry and recent fault-slip motions to ultimately understand the tectonic development of this enigmatic part of the Walker Lane. Paleomagnetic directions were collected from structural-blocks where multiple ash-flow tuffs crop out in stratigraphic succession, and at least one sampled unit has a previously established reference direction. This approach will allow for determination of the magnitude of vertical-axis rotation at each locality and provide an opportunity to infer paleomagnetic reference directions for other ash-flow tuffs. Preliminary paleomagnetic data have identified statistically-significant magnitudes of vertical-axis rotation (~20-50° clockwise) west of central Walker Lane dextral faults. Magnetostratigraphic correlations to the geomagnetic time scale have refined ages for several ash-flow tuffs, and span ~5 Ma of the late Oligocene (chrons: 6Cn.3n-10r). The results of this research will not only elucidate the manner in which dextral shear is accommodated in this portion of the Walker Lane, but also provide an extensive data set for establishing Oligocene ash-flow tuff paleomagnetic reference directions and regional correlations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86129", "section":"Geomagnetism and Paleomagnetism"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86132" } }
{"authors":"Jean Palutikof::National Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility--David Rissik::National Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility--Fahim Tonmoy::National Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility--Sarah Boulter::National Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility--", "title":"PA42A-07: Translating Knowledge into Action: Supporting Adaptation in Australia’s Coastal Zone through Information Provision and Decision Support", "abstract":"Adaptation to risks from climate change and sea-level rise is particularly important in Australia, where 70% of the population live in major coastal cities and 85% within 50km of the coast. Adaptation activity focuses at local government level and, in the absence of strong leadership from central government, the extent to which local councils have taken action to adapt is highly variable across the nation. Also, although a number of councils have proceeded as far as identifying their exposure to risk and considering adaptation options, this fails to translate into action. A principal reason for this is concern over the response from coastal residents to actions which may affect property values, and fear of litigation. A project is underway to support councils to understand their risks, evaluate adaptation options and proceed to action. This support will consist of a three-pronged framework: provision of information, a tool to support decision-making, and a community forum. Delivery involves research to understand the barriers to adaptation and how these may be overcome, optimal methods for delivery of information, and the information needs of organizations, action-takers and communities. The presentation will focus on the results of consultation undertaken to understand users’ information needs around content and delivery, and how understanding of these needs has translated into design of the framework. A strongly preference was expressed to learn from peers, and a challenge for the framework is to understand how to inject adaptation knowledge which is up-to-date and accurate into peer-to-peer conversations. The community forum is one mechanism to achieve this. The basic structure and delivery mechanisms of the framework are shown in the attached.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86132", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86133" } }
{"authors":"Carla McAuliffe::Technical Education Research Centers--", "title":"ED34C-08: Using Federally Funded Curricular Materials to meet Next Geneartion Science Standards in Earth System Science", "abstract":"The Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) describe teaching and learning goals for Earth system science at all levels of K-12, including elementary, middle school, and high school. Teachers must consider science and engineering practices, cross-cutting concepts, and disciplinary core ideas. The National Science Foundation and other federal organizations have supported the development of reformed curricular materials at the K-12 level for many years. Although developed before the adoption of NGSS, many of these Earth system science resources are, in fact, NGSS congruent. Such resources include those developed by TERC, SERC, EDC, NASA, NOAA, USGS, and others. This session features NGSS congruent materials, carefully examining and dissecting the performance expectations that embody these materials. It also shares a process of tagging these materials via NSTA’s, NGSS portal guidelines.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86133", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86134" } }
{"authors":"Igor Sokolov::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Ward Manchester::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Bart van der Holst::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Tamas Gombosi::Univ of Michigan--Meng Jin::Lockheed Martin Solar and Astrophysics Laboratory--Richard Mullinix::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Aleksandre Taktakishvili::NASA GSFC--Anna Chulaki::NASA/GSFC--Gabor Toth::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--", "title":"SH21B-2403: New Publicly Available EEGGL Tool for Simulating Coronal Mass Ejections.", "abstract":"We present and demonstrate a new tool, EEGGL (Eruptive Event Generator using Gibson-Low configuration) for simulating CMEs (Coronal Mass Ejections). CMEs are among the most significant space weather events, producing the radiation hazards (via the diffuse shock acceleration of the Solar Energetic Particles – SEPs), the interplanetary shock waves as well as the geomagnetic activity due to the drastic changes of the interplanetary magnetic field within the “magnetic clouds” (` flux ropes”). Some of this effects may be efficiently simulated using the “cone model”, which is employed in the real-time simulations of the ongoing CMEs at the NASA-Goddard Space Flight Center. The cone model provides a capability to predict the location, time, width and shape of the hydrodynamic perturbation in the upper solar corona (at ~0.1 AU), which can be used to drive the heliospheric simulation (with the ENLIL code, for example). At the same time the magnetic field orientation in this perturbation is uncertain within the cone model, which limits the capability of the geomagnetic activity forecast. The new EEGGL tool http://ccmc.gsfc.nasa.gov/analysis/EEGGL/recently developed at the Goddard Space Flight Center in collaboration with the University of Michigan provides a new capability for both evaluating the magnetic field configuration resulting from the CME and tracing the CME through the solar corona. In this way not only the capability to simulate the magnetic field evolution at 1 AU may be achieved, but also the more extensive comparison with the CME observations in the solar corona may be achieved. Based on the magnetogram and evaluation of the CME initial location and speed, the user may choose the active region from which the CME originates and then the EEGGL tools provides the parameters of the Gibson-Low magnetic configuration to parameterize the CME. The recommended parameters may be used then to drive the simulation of CME propagation from the low solar corona to 1 AU using the global code for simulating the solar corona and inner heliosphere. The Community Coordinated Modeling Center (CCMC) provides the capability for CME runs-on-request, to the heliophysics community.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86134", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86135" } }
{"authors":"Jennifer Pett-Ridge::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--Karis McFarlane::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--Katherine Heckman::US Forest Service Pacific Southwest Region Vallejo--Sasha Reed::Southwest Biological Science Center Moab--Tana Wood::Usda Forest Service C/o Gisel--", "title":"B41G-0511: Into the Deep: Variability in Soil Microbial Communities and Carbon Turnover Along a Tropical Forest Soil Depth Profile", "abstract":"Tropical forest soils store more carbon (C) than any other terrestrial ecosystem and exchange vast amounts of CO2, water, and energy with the atmosphere. Much of this C is leached and stored within deeper soil layers, but we know exceedingly little about the fate of this C or the microbial communities that drive deep soil biogeochemistry. From the data that do exist, most organic matter (OM) in tropical soils appears associated with mineral particles, suggesting deep soils may provide greater C stabilization due to organo-metal co-precipitation and mineral-surface interactions. However, few studies have evaluated sub-surface soils in tropical ecosystems, the turnover times of deep soil C, and sensitivity of this C to global environmental change. To address this critical research need, we quantified C pools, microbial communities and soil radiocarbon turnover times in bulk soils and soil fractions [free light (unprotected), dense (mineral-associated)] from 0-140 cm in replicate soil pits in the Luquillo Experimental Forest, Puerto Rico. Unsurprisingly, we found soil C, nitrogen, and root and microbial biomass all declined exponentially with depth; total C stocks dropped from 5.5 % at the surface to <0.5% at 140cm depth. Soil OM 14C and mean turnover times were variable across replicate horizons, ranging from 3-1500 years at the surface (0-20 cm), to 5000-40,000 years at 140 cm depth. Soil C in the mineral associated fraction was much older than the free light fraction C, which reflected modern 14C at all depths. In comparison to temperate deciduous forests, these 14C values reflect far older soil C, and OM decomposition that highly favors free light C pools, even at depth. While previous work suggests these low C tropical subsoils contain small but metabolically active microbial communities at depths of ~100cm, these organisms appear highly OM limited, and preferentially degrade recent inputs. In the coming half century, tropical forests are predicted to see a 2 – 5 ° C temperature increase and substantial differences in rainfall amount and timing. The data described here represent baseline data for a site now undergoing a 4°C warming experiment; upcoming research will examine soil C storage and mean residence times during and post-warming to improve numerical models of ecosystem warming effects in tropical forests.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86135", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86137" } }
{"authors":"Jose Rosas-Elguera::Universidad de Guadalajara--Héctor Lopez Loera::Instituto Potosino de Investigación Cientifica--Emilia Fregoso::Universidad de Guadalajara, CUCEI--Roberto Maciel Flores::Universidad de Guadalajara, CUCBA--Laura Peña::Universidad de Guadalajara, CUCBA--Miguel Angel Alatorre-Zamora::---", "title":"EP53A-0994: The Northern Boundary of the Michoacan Block: As Inferred From Aeromagnetic Data", "abstract":"The western part of the Guerrero terrane is comprised of the Jalisco and Michoacan Blocks (Rosas-Elguera et al., 1996 and references therein), a fault-bounded crustal blocks at western of Mexico. The Michoacan block is bounded by the N-NE segment of the Rio Balsas in the east, and the Colima graben in the west, the Chapala-Oaxaca fault to the north, and the Middle America Trench to the south. Northern boundary is formed with the Chapala-Oaxaca fault zone (Harrison y Johnson, 1985). The Cotija half-graben is the end-tip of this fault zone. A combined radiometric and paleomagnetic analyses in the Cotija half-graben were carried out (Rosas-Elguera, et al, 2003). Radiometric dates between 31.60 and 8.39 Ma confirm both the southern extension of the Sierra Madre Occidental and the early mafic Tans-Mexican Volcanic Belt succession at the northern part of the Michoacan block. Paleomagnetic data indicate a counterclockwise rotation of ~ 24° about a vertical axis for the Michoacan block. The Michoacan-Guanajuato Volcanic Field forms an area of extensive monogenetic volcanism. This volcanic field contains more than 1000 eruptive centers distributed over an area of 40,000 Km2. The Chapala-Oaxaca fault zone separates the northern MGVF and the southern MGVF. Hasenaka and Carmichael (1987) recognized three different petrologic associations in the MGVF: calc-alkaline rocks typical arc characteristic, K2O-rich alkaline rocks with relatively high MgO contents and TiO2-rich alkaline rocks with relatively low MgO contents. We present the aeromagnetic results (after Consejo de Recursos Minerales, 1999) which suggest a clear relationship between the geologic features and the magnetic response.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86137", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86138" } }
{"authors":"Chelsea Corr::Oak Ridge Associated Universities Inc.--John Barrick::Science Systems and Applications, Inc. Hampton--Andreas Beyersdorf::NASA Langley Research Center--Gao Chen::NASA Langley Research Ctr--James Crawford::NASA Langley Research Center--Carolyn Jordan::National Institute of Aerospace--Richard Moore::NASA Langley Research Center--Michael Shook::Science Systems and Applications, Inc.--Kenneth Thornhill::Science Systems and Applications, Inc. Hampton--Edward Winstead::Science Systems and Applications, Inc. Hampton--Luke Ziemba::NASA Langley Research Center--Sasha Madronich::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Bruce Anderson::NASA Langley Research Center--", "title":"A21A-0027: The Influence of Aerosol Composition on Photolysis Rates Based on Airborne Observations", "abstract":"The potential variability in modeled photolysis rates introduced by aerosol optical properties measured at visible wavelengths is presented here. Aerosol scattering and absorption were measured aboard the NASA P-3B aircraft during the Deriving Information on Surface conditions from Column and Vertically Resolved Observations Relevant to Air Quality (DISCOVER-AQ) using a TSI Nephelometer and a Radiance Research Particle Soot Absorption Photometer (PSAP), respectively. To isolate the effect of aerosols on photolysis rates, cloud-free case studies were identified using aircraft videos for the four DISCOVER-AQ deployments: Baltimore, MD-Washington, D.C. in July 2011, the California Central Valley in January/February 2013, Houston, TX in September 2013, and Denver, CO in July 2014. For these case studies, absorption measurements at 470 and 532 nm were extrapolated to the Nephelometer wavelengths (450 and 550nm) using the 470-532nm absorption Angstrom exponent (AAE470-532) to calculate aerosol extinction and SSAs at these wavelengths. Photolysis rates were modeled using the Tropospheric Ultraviolet model version 5.2 (TUV 5.2) for three scenarios: 1) an aerosol-free case, 2) using a spectrally-flat SSA at 550nm and 3) using a spectrally-dependent SSA derived from scattering and absorption measurements. Modeled photolysis rates were compared to those measured aboard the P-3B during DISCOVER-AQ. The relationship between airborne measurements of water soluble organic carbon (WSOC) made by a Particle-Into-Liquid-Sampler (PILS), AAE470-532 and model/measurement discrepancies were explored to assess the influence of aerosol composition on photolysis rates. Additional comparisons between photolysis rates modeled with vertically-resolved aerosol optical properties and those modeled using column-average values were performed to assess the influence of aerosol vertical distribution on photolysis rates.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86138", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86139" } }
{"authors":"Hunsun Yu::Pukyong National University--Dong Hwan Kang::Pukyong National University--Sang Jin Kim::Pukyong National University--YoonHwan So::Pukyong National University--", "title":"H41G-1463: Fate of Fe, As in Acid Mine Drainage (AMD) was created Disused Metal Mine", "abstract":"This study is a natural reduction of Fe and As in AMD. AMD is produced by oxidation of pyrite, the iron, the sulfate mineral dissolution action. It is generated by the sulfide minerals, water, oxygen, the reaction of microorganisms in the underground. AMD is low pH due to dissolved minerals in the mine are different kinds of heavy metals will leach. If the flow out of mines and react with dissolved oxygen (DO) is increased, due to oxidation and microbiological activity of the Fe it is precipitated biomat is produced. This study area is Ilgwng disused mines in the Republic of Korea Busan Gijanggun. March to September 2010 taken by the AMD and biomat analyze Fe and As. The main mineral is Chalcopyrite (Cu2Fe2S4), Arsenopyrite (FeAsS), Pyrite (FeS2), Pyrrhotite (Fe1-xS), Sphalerite (ZnS), Galena (PbS), Scheelite (CaWO4), Wolframite ((Fe, Mn)WO4) and the like. Analysis of the AMD of underground pH 2.4~2.8, DO 1.3~4.8mg/L, Fe 474.3~178.8mg/L, As 0~3.2mg/L. Analysis AMD of the flow out of mine pH 2.3~2.9, DO 6.7~9.5mg/L, Fe 81.9~438.7L, As 0~2.8mg/L. The content of Fe in the biomat is 244.242mg/kg, the content of As is 5647mg/kg in the adsorption reaction of the Fe. AMD of disused metal mine mineral leaching occur in a reducing environment, in an oxidizing environment it caused precipitation and adsorption reactions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86139", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86140" } }
{"authors":"Jefferson Chang::Oklahoma Geological Survey University of Oklahoma--Kevin Crain::Oklahoma Geological Survey--", "title":"NS42A-02: Semi-Infinite Geology Modeling Algorithm (SIGMA): a Modular Approach to 3D Gravity", "abstract":"Conventional 3D gravity computations can take up to days, weeks, and even months, depending on the size and resolution of the data being modeled. Additional modeling runs, due to technical malfunctions or additional data modifications, only compound computation times even further. We propose a new modeling algorithm that utilizes vertical line elements to approximate mass, and non-gridded (point) gravity observations. This algorithm is (1) magnitudes faster than conventional methods, (2) accurate to less than 0.1% error, and (3) modular. The modularity of this methodology means that researchers can modify their geology/terrain or gravity data, and only the modified component needs to be re-run. Additionally, land-, sea-, and air-based platforms can be modeled at their observation point, without having to filter data into a synthesized grid.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86140", "section":"Near Surface Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86141" } }
{"authors":"Liliane Burkhard::University of Hawaii at Manoa--Marissa Cameron::University of Hawaii at Manoa--Bridget Smith-Konter::University of Hawaii at Manoa--Fiona Seifert::University of Michigan--Robert Pappalardo::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Geoffrey Collins::Wheaton College--", "title":"P31B-2064: Strike-Slip Faulting Processes on Ganymede: Global Morphological Mapping and Structural Interpretation of Grooved and Transitional Terrains", "abstract":"Ganymede’s fractured surface reveals many large-scale, morphologically distinct regions of inferred distributed shear and strike-slip faulting that may be important to the structural development of its surface and in the transition from dark to light (grooved) materials. To better understand the role of strike-slip tectonism in shaping Ganymede’s complex icy surface, we perform a detailed mapping of key examples of strike-slip morphologies (i.e., en echelon structures, strike-slip duplexes, laterally offset pre-existing features, and possible strained craters) from Galileo and Voyager images. We focus on complex structures associated with grooved terrain (e.g. Nun Sulcus, Dardanus Sulcus, Tiamat Sulcus, and Arbela Sulcus) and terrains transitional from dark to light terrain (e.g. the boundary between Nippur Sulcus and Marius Regio, including Byblus Sulcus and Philus Sulcus). Detailed structural interpretations suggest strong evidence of strike-slip faulting in some regions (i.e., Nun and Dardanus Sulcus); however, further investigation of additional strike-slip structures is required of less convincing regions (i.e., Byblus Sulcus). Where applicable, these results are synthesized into a global database representing an inferred sense of shear for many of Ganymede’s fractures. Moreover, when combined with existing observations of extensional features, these results help to narrow down the range of possible principal stress directions that could have acted at the regional or global scale to produce grooved terrain on Ganymede.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86141", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86142" } }
{"authors":"Gifford Wong::Dartmouth College--", "title":"PA24A-06: Science and Improv: Saying “YES” to Creative Collaboration and Scintillating Communication", "abstract":"Communicating research results to a non-specialist audience can be challenging. Strategies that work well in lab group meetings, such as using acronyms and jargon, may fall flat with 7th graders or Congressional staffers. Empowering real-world audiences with our stories helps raise awareness and inform decision-making, whether it’s related to family food purchases or national policy. Ideally, we scientists, engineers and researchers directly connect with our audiences, responding spontaneously and actively, distilling our messages into conversational morsels that resonate with them. One tool that I have found useful is deeply rooted in the “tao” of improvisational theater. Why improv? Improv is dancing as if no one is watching, baking from scratch, and playing jazz flute. Improv is Iron Chef, MacGyver with a license to thrill, or the game-winning play. Research is inspired improvisation. And improv can teach us a lot about how to play, how to feel comfortable and present even while flailing, and how to truly listen. Effective science communicators listen. In fact, therein lies the power of “yes …”, a building block of improvisational theater. “Yes …” is both collaborative (“yes, and …”) and innovative (“yes, because …”), and investment in an attitude of saying “yes …” demonstrates an intent to listen. Improv is not any one specific thing so much as a process by which we do things. Skills that strengthen communication, such as spontaneity, authenticity and connectivity, are honed through philosophies inherent in improv. This presentation highlights improv-based activities that enhance science communication with purpose, vividness, and emotion.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86142", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86144" } }
{"authors":"James Blair::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--David Rabine::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Michelle Hofton::University of Maryland College Park--Elizabeth Citrin::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Scott Luthcke::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Amy Misakonis::Sigma Space Corporation--Shane Wake::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--", "title":"G11B-0985: Geodetic Imaging Lidar: Applications for high-accuracy, large area mapping with NASA’s upcoming high-altitude waveform-based airborne laser altimetry Facility", "abstract":"Full waveform laser altimetry has demonstrated its ability to capture highly-accurate surface topography and vertical structure (e.g. vegetation height and structure) even in the most challenging conditions. NASA’s high-altitude airborne laser altimeter, LVIS (the Land Vegetation, and Ice Sensor) has produced high-accuracy surface maps over a wide variety of science targets for the last 2 decades. Recently NASA has funded the transition of LVIS into a full-time NASA airborne Facility instrument to increase the amount and quality of the data and to decrease the end-user costs, to expand the utilization and application of this unique sensor capability. Based heavily on the existing LVIS sensor design, the Facility LVIS instrument includes numerous improvements for reliability, resolution, real-time performance monitoring and science products, decreased operational costs, and improved data turnaround time and consistency. The development of this Facility instrument is proceeding well and it is scheduled to begin operations testing in mid-2016. A comprehensive description of the LVIS Facility capability will be presented along with several mission scenarios and science applications examples. The sensor improvements included increased spatial resolution (footprints as small as 5 m), increased range precision (sub-cm single shot range precision), expanded dynamic range, improved detector sensitivity, operational autonomy, real-time flight line tracking, and overall increased reliability and sensor calibration stability. The science customer mission planning and data product interface will be discussed. Science applications of the LVIS Facility include: cryosphere, territorial ecology carbon cycle, hydrology, solid earth and natural hazards, and biodiversity.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86144", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86145" } }
{"authors":"Zackary Reynolds::Keene State College--", "title":"H11E-1390: Variability of Ecosystem State in Rivers Containing Natural Dams: A Chemical Analysis", "abstract":"Flooding, and the resulting economic damage to roads and property, is associated with natural dams such as beaver dams or log jams. For this reason, humans often remove natural dams; however, river reaches with natural dams provide very different ecosystem services in comparison with free-flowing river reaches. Therefore, the goal of this project is to assess the differences in ecosystem state between these different river reach types in the northeastern United States. We focused on differences in basic chemistry (e.g., dissolved oxygen, pH, temperature, and organic carbon) to assess the impact of natural dams on river ecosystem state. Study sites include rivers in the White Mountains and southeastern New Hampshire at locations with beaver dams, beaver ponds, beaver meadows, log jams, and free-flowing reaches. Dissolved oxygen, ORP, pH, temperature, and conductivity were measured in the field with a YSI Professional Plus meter. Water samples were collected for subsequent laboratory analysis of total organic carbon with a Shimadzu TOC-L. Preliminary results show that the chemistry of river water varies with feature type. Most significantly, dissolved oxygen concentrations are highest in free-flowing reaches and lowest in beaver ponds. Although beaver ponds are often associated with lower pH, due the increased concentration of organic acids, some beaver ponds can increase pH when compared to free-flowing reaches on the same river. Early results also show that water chemistry returns quickly to the chemistry typical of the free-flowing river reaches after being altered by a natural dam. Overall, natural dams create a river system that has more heterogeneity, and therefore has opportunities to provide more ecosystem functions, than a purely free-flowing river; this can increase the number of supported instream and riparian species. By increasing the understanding of how natural dams affect the chemistry of river water, river engineers can improve their decisions on how to remove problematic natural dams that increase flooding risks; they can also investigate possibilities to mimic the ecosystem state generated by natural dams in places where these dams are regularly removed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86145", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86146" } }
{"authors":"Masa Prodanovic::University of Texas at Austin--Maria Esteva::University of Texas at Austin--Matthew Hanlon::University of Texas at Austin--Gaurav Nanda::University of Texas at Austin--Prateek Agarwal::University of Texas at Austin--", "title":"MR43A-02: Digital Rocks Portal: a sustainable platform for imaged dataset sharing, translation and automated analysis", "abstract":"Recent advances in imaging have provided a wealth of 3D datasets that reveal pore space microstructure (nm to cm length scale) and allow investigation of nonlinear flow and mechanical phenomena from first principles using numerical approaches. This framework has popularly been called “digital rock physics”. Researchers, however, have trouble storing and sharing the datasets both due to their size and the lack of standardized image types and associated metadata for volumetric datasets. This impedes scientific cross-validation of the numerical approaches that characterize large scale porous media properties, as well as development of multiscale approaches required for correct upscaling. A single research group typically specializes in an imaging modality and/or related modeling on a single length scale, and lack of data-sharing infrastructure makes it difficult to integrate different length scales. We developed a sustainable, open and easy-to-use repository called the Digital Rocks Portal, that (1) organizes images and related experimental measurements of different porous materials, (2) improves access to them for a wider community of geosciences or engineering researchers not necessarily trained in computer science or data analysis. Once widely accepter, the repository will jumpstart productivity and enable scientific inquiry and engineering decisions founded on a data-driven basis. This is the first repository of its kind. We show initial results on incorporating essential software tools and pipelines that make it easier for researchers to store and reuse data, and for educators to quickly visualize and illustrate concepts to a wide audience. For data sustainability and continuous access, the portal is implemented within the reliable, 24/7 maintained High Performance Computing Infrastructure supported by the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) at the University of Texas at Austin. Long-term storage is provided through the University of Texas System Research Cyber-infrastructure initiative.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86146", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86147" } }
{"authors":"Jochen Braunmiller::University of South Florida Tampa--", "title":"S11A-2755: Arizona Regional Moment Tensor Catalog 1990-2015", "abstract":"Seismicity in Arizona is moderate compared to other parts of the U.S. Intermountain West region. However, large (M6+) damaging earthquakes have occurred in the past suggesting significant regional deformation and associated seismic hazard exist. Seismicity is concentrated in north-central Arizona near the western edge of the Colorado Plateau with scattered activity in the Arizona Transition Zone and the southern Basin and Range province extending towards the Rio Grande Rift. Sparse seismic station coverage had prevented a comprehensive analysis of earthquake source parameters so far. Permanent broadband seismic stations were installed starting in the 1990’s but coverage expanded significantly only in 2006 with the EarthScope Transportable Array and its legacy stations. Utilizing regional three-component broadband waveforms, we attempted seismic moment tensor inversion for all M4+ and M3.5+ earthquakes since 1990 and 2000, respectively. We obtained source parameters (faulting style, depth, seismic moment) for over 40 events in Arizona and vicinity ranging from Mw=3.2 to 5.3 roughly doubling the existing database. Mechanisms along a band extending from northwestern to southeastern Arizona show predominant normal faulting character. T-axes are usually E-W oriented but rotate towards N-S near 35N. Events near the Nevada-Utah border have strike-slip mechanisms with NW-SE oriented T-axes while to the south a few western Arizona strike-slip events have more northerly oriented T-axes. Centroid depths are mainly in the upper 10-15 km with a slight tendency of deeper sources proximal to the Colorado Plateau. The largest earthquake during the last 20 years, an Mw=5.2 event in June 2014, occurred in otherwise quiet southeastern Arizona underscoring the potential for significant earthquake sources throughout most of the state. The main shock at 9-12 km depth has an oblique normal faulting mechanism while the vivid aftershock sequence shows mechanisms that range from strike-slip to normal faulting.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86147", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86148" } }
{"authors":"Andrew Wells::University of Oxford--", "title":"C21A-0690: Impact of ice-shelf sediment content on the dynamics of plumes under melting ice shelves", "abstract":"When a floating ice shelf melts into an underlying warm salty ocean, the resulting fresh meltwater can rise in a buoyant Ice-Shelf-Water plume under the ice. In certain settings, ice flowing across the grounding line carries a basal layer of debris rich ice, entrained via basal freezing around till in the upstream ice sheet. Melting of this debris-laden ice from floating ice shelves provides a flux of dense sediment to the ocean, in addition to the release of fresh buoyant meltwater. This presentation considers the impact of the resulting suspended sediment on the dynamics of ice shelf water plumes, and identifies two key flow regimes depending on the sediment concentration frozen into the basal ice layer. For large sediment concentration, melting of the debris-laden ice shelf generates dense convectively unstable waters that drive convective overturning into the underlying ocean. For lower sediment concentration, the sediment initially remains suspended in a buoyant meltwater plume rising along the underside of the ice shelf, before slowly depositing into the underlying ocean. A theoretical plume model is used to evaluate the significance of the negatively buoyant sediment on circulation strength and the feedbacks on melting rate, along with the expected depositional patterns under the ice shelf.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86148", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86149" } }
{"authors":"Evan Jones::Colorado School of Mines--Piret Plink-Bjorklund::Colorado School of Mines--", "title":"EP33C-1085: Flashy Water and Sediment Delivery to Fluvial Megafan andFan Delta Systems on Opposing Shorelines of an Early Eocene Lake", "abstract":"Flashy delivery of water and sediment had distinct effects on the process of deposition in coeval fluvial megafan and fan delta deposits on opposing shorelines of a paleolake that occupied the Uinta Basin throughout the Eocene. The Tertiary Uinta Basin was an asymmetric continental interior basin with a steep northern margin, adjacent to the block uplift controlling basin subsidence, and a low gradient southern margin. A ~140 km wide fluvial megafan with catchments as far as ~750 km away occupied the southern margin of the lacustrine basin. Within this megafan system, fluvial deposits contain within-channel continental bioturbation and paleosol development on bar accretion surfaces that are evidence of prolonged periods of groundwater flow or channel abandonment. These are punctuated by channel fills exhibiting a suite of both high-deposition rate and upper flow regime sedimentary structures that were deposited by very rapid suspension-fallout during seasonal to episodic river flooding events. A series of small (~8 km wide) and proximally sourced fan deltas fed sediment into the steeper northern margin of the lacustrine basin. 35-50% of the deposits in the delta plain environment of these fan deltas are very sandy debris flows with as low as 5% clay and silt sized material. Detrital zircon geochronology shows that these fan deltas were tapping catchments where mostly unconsolidated Cretaceous sedimentary cover and thick Jurassic eolianites were being eroded. A combination of flashy precipitation, arid climate, catchments mantled by abundant loose sand-sized colluvium, and steep depositional gradients promoted generation of abundant very sandy (5-10% clay and silt sized material) debris flows. In this way, the Wasatch and Green River Formations in the Uinta Basin, Utah, U.S.A. gives us two very different examples of how routing flashy water and sediment delivery (associated with pulses of hyperthermal climate change during the Early Eocene) through different depositional systems produced unique processes of deposition, and also gives us an opportunity to isolate the effects of other variables (e.g. sediment caliber, system gradient, catchment size) that can modulate the flashy precipitation signal in stratigraphy.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86149", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86150" } }
{"authors":"Shaela Jones::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Joseph Davila::NASA Goddard SFC--Vadim Uritsky::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--", "title":"SH31C-2443: Improving Heliospheric Field Models with Optimized Coronal Models", "abstract":"The Solar Orbiter and Solar Probe Plus missions will travel closer to the sun than any previous mission, collecting unprecedented in situ data. This data can provide insight into coronal structure, energy transport, and evolution in the inner heliosphere. However, in order to take full advantage of this data, researchers need quality models of the inner heliosphere to connect the in situ observations to their coronal and photospheric sources. Developing quality models for this region of space has proved difficult, in part because the only part of the field that is accessible for routine measurement is the photosphere. The photospheric field measurements, though somewhat problematic, are used as boundary conditions for coronal models, which often neglect or over-simplify chromospheric conditions, and these coronal models are then used as boundary conditions to drive heliospheric models. The result is a great deal of uncertainty about the accuracy and reliability of the heliospheric models. Here we present a technique we are developing for improving global coronal magnetic field models by optimizing the models to conform to the field morphology observed in coronal images. This agreement between the coronal model and the basic morphology of the corona is essential for creating accurate heliospheric models. We will present results of early tests of two implementations of this idea, and its first application to real-world data.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86150", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86153" } }
{"authors":"Ulrike Seibt::University of California Los Angeles--Kadmiel Maseyk::Open University--Céline Lett::NERC British Antarctic Survey--Wu Sun::University of California Los Angeles--", "title":"B31E-08: Canopy-scale GPP from Measurements of Carbonyl Sulfide in a Freshwater Marsh", "abstract":"We demonstrate the application of carbonyl sulfide (COS) measurements to obtain new estimates of canopy-scale Gross Primary Production (GPP). We measured net ecosystem fluxes of COS and CO2 at an established flux tower site in a freshwater marsh in southern California during the growing season. The ecosystem acted as a strong sink of COS. The daytime variations mirrored those of CO2, however, COS uptake continued at night whereas the CO2 flux became very small. During the first part of the field campaign, the marsh was inundated which essentially eliminated surface fluxes, providing ideal test conditions for the COS-based flux partitioning method. The GPP estimates obtained from measured COS fluxes agreed well with thoses calculated using CO2-based partitioning methods. One of the most widely used flux partitioning methods, using the relationship of night-time fluxes and temperature, did poorly due to lack of turbulence at night. Our results demonstrate that adding COS to flux tower measurements would provide valuable observation-based constraints on the land carbon cycle.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86153", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86154" } }
{"authors":"Wesley Danskin::USGS California Water Science Center San Diego--Geoff Cromwell::USGS California Water Science Center San Diego--Carolyn Glockhoff::San Diego Association of Geologists--DJ Martin::USGS California Water Science Center San Diego--", "title":"H31G-1522: 3D Geologic Model of the San Diego Area", "abstract":"Prior geologic studies of the San Diego area, including northern Baja California, Mexico, focused on site investigations, characterization of rock formations, or earthquake hazards. No comprehensive, quantitative model characterizing the three-dimensional (3D) geology of the entire area has been developed. The lack of such a model limits understanding of large-scale processes, such as development of ancient landforms, and groundwater movement and availability. To evaluate these regional processes, the United States Geological Survey (USGS) conducted a study to better understand the geologic structure of the San Diego area. A cornerstone of this study is the installation and analysis of 77 wells at 12 multiple-depth monitoring-well sites. Geologic information from these wells was combined with lithologic data from 81 oil exploration wells and municipal and private water wells, gravity and seismic interpretations, and paleontological interpretations. These data were analyzed in conjunction with geologic maps and digital elevation models to develop a 3D geologic model of the San Diego area, in particular of the San Diego embayment. Existing interpretations of regional surficial geology, faulting, and tectonic history provided the framework for this model, which was refined by independent evaluation of subsurface geology. Geologic formations were simplified into five sedimentary units (Quaternary, Plio-Pleistocene, Oligocene, Eocene and Cretaceous ages), and one basal crystalline unit (primarily Cretaceous and Jurassic). Complex fault systems are represented in the model by ten fault strands that maintain overall displacement. The 3D geologic model corroborates existing geologic concepts of the San Diego area, refines the extent of subsurface geology, and allows users to holistically evaluate subsurface structures and regional hydrogeology.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86154", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86155" } }
{"authors":"Levi Silvers::Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory--Bjorn Stevens::Max Planck Institute for Meteorology--Thorsten Mauritsen::Max Planck Institute for Meteorology--Giorgetta Marco::Max Planck Institute for Meteorology--", "title":"A51F-0136: Parameterized Radiative Convective Equilibrium Across a Range of Domains: A Unifying Tool for General Circulation Models and High Resolution Models", "abstract":"The characteristics of clouds in General Circulation Models (GCMs) need to be constrained in a consistent manner with theory, observations, and high resolution models (HRMs). One way forward is to base improvements of parameterizations on high resolution studies which resolve more of the important dynamical motions and allow for less parameterizations. This is difficult because of the numerous differences between GCMs and HRMs, both technical and theoretical. Century long simulations at resolutions of 20-250 km on a global domain are typical of GCMs while HRMs often simulate hours at resolutions of 0.1km-5km on domains the size of a single GCM grid cell. The recently developed mode ICON provides a flexible framework which allows many of these difficulties to be overcome. This study uses the ICON model to compute SST perturbation simulations on multiple domains in a state of Radiative Convective Equilibrium (RCE) with parameterized convection. The domains used range from roughly the size of Texas to nearly half of Earth's surface area. All simulations use a doubly periodic domain with an effective distance between cell centers of 13 km and are integrated to a state of statistical stationarity. The primary analysis examines the mean characteristics of the cloud related fields and the feedback parameter of the simulations. It is shown that the simulated atmosphere of a GCM in RCE is sufficiently similar across a range of domain sizes to justify the use of RCE to study both a GCM and a HRM on the same domain with the goal of improved constraints on the parameterized clouds. The simulated atmospheres are comparable to what could be expected at midday in a typical region of Earth’s tropics under calm conditions. In particular, the differences between the domains are smaller than differences which result from choosing different physics schemes. Significant convective organization is present on all domain sizes with a relatively high subsidence fraction. Notwithstanding the overall qualitative similarities of the simulations, quantitative differences lead to a surprisingly large sensitivity of the feedback parameter. This range of the feedback parameter is more than a factor of two and is similar to the range of feedbacks which were obtained by the CMIP5 models.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86155", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86156" } }
{"authors":"In-Young Yeo::University of Maryland--", "title":"H11E-1383: Integrated landscape-based approach of remote sensing, GIS, and physical modelling to study the hydrological connectivity of wetlands to the downstream water: progress and challenge", "abstract":"We report the recent progress on our effort to improve the mapping of wetland dynamics and the modelling of its functioning and hydrological connection to the downstream waters. Our study focused on the Coastal Plain of the Chesapeake Bay Watershed (CBW), the Delmarva Peninsula, where the most of wetlands in CBW are densely distributed. The wetland ecosystem plays crucial roles in improving water quality and ecological integrity for the downstream waters and the Chesapeake Bay, and headwater wetlands in the region, such as Delmarva Bay, are now subject to the legal protection under the Clean Water Rules. We developed new wetland maps using time series Landsat images and a highly accurate LiDAR map over last 30 years. These maps show the changes in surface water fraction at a 30-m grid cell at annual time scale. Using GIS, we analyse these maps to characterize changing dynamics of wetland inundation due to the physical environmental factors (e.g., weather variability, tide) and assessed the hydrological connection of wetlands to the downstream water at the watershed scale. Focusing on the two adjacent watersheds in the upper region of the Choptank River Basin, we study how wetland inundation dynamics and the hydrologic linkage of wetlands to downstream water would vary by the local hydrogeological setting and attempt to identify the key landscape factors affecting the wetland ecosystems and functioning. We then discuss the potential of using remote sensing products to improve the physical modelling of wetlands from our experience with SWAT (Soil and Water Assessment Tool).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86156", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86158" } }
{"authors":"Athena Nghiem::University of California Berkeley--Hyojin Kim::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--Hannah Bourne::University of California Berkeley--Benjamin Thurnhoffer::University of California Berkeley--James Bishop::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"H21C-1394: Comparative Spatial and Temporal Analysis of Particle Composition through the Critical Zone in the Investigation of Groundwater and Stream Chemistry", "abstract":"Investigation into particle composition and flux of weathered material transported by rivers to the ocean basins provides insight into seasonal dynamics in chemical weathering of stream environments and on the delivery of micronutrient elements such as Fe and Mn to the coastal zone. At the headwaters of the South Fork Eel River in Northern California, the site of the Eel River Critical Zone Observatory, the temporal and spatial variability of groundwater and effects of depth and speed of water movement on stream chemistry dynamics have been examined by Kim et al. (2014). Through automated ISCO Gravity Filtration System (GFS; Kim et al. 2012, EST), samples of groundwater and stream water have been collected at frequency of one to three days since 2009 from three wells (Well 1 down-slope, Well 3 mid-slope, Well 10 up-slope) and Elder Creek and filtered through 0.45 μm diameter Supor filters. Preliminary analysis of the filters via measurements of optical density (from sample photography under controlled lighting) have served as selection aid for identifying relevant environmental phenomena such as rainstorms and wildfires in the study of reactive particulate phases. Here we investigate solubilization strategies (e.g. strong acid leaching or total digest) for sample pretreatment prior to ICP-MS analysis and the sample time series. Results from ICP analysis of particles are compared with the same temporal points taken of water samples, such as with Mn and Fe. Previous research into the fate and transport of these metals suggest that Mn exists primarily in a dissolved phase while Fe exists in colloidal phases, produced by chemical weathering in the vadose zone, which may be tested with the compositional analysis of the filter particulates. Overall, compositional analyses of filter particles and comparison with water chemistry data will complete the picture of temporal and spatial dynamics of chemical weathering.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86158", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86159" } }
{"authors":"Franklin Koch::University of Calgary--Adam Pidlisecky::University of Calgary--", "title":"NS22A-05: Moment-Based Inversions for Electrical Resistivity Tomography - A Problem-Specific Approach to Reducing the Dimensionality", "abstract":"Surface electrical resistivity tomography (ERT) is often used to monitor solute plumes. Inverting the data on a pixel-based grid provides a snapshot of the subsurface conductivity, but even with a large amount of data, the number of model cells outnumbers the amount of independent measurements and sensitivity is variable across the model space. To overcome these problems and converge on a final conductivity image, additional regularization is often imposed, such as smoothness constraints. This regularization can distort the perceived geometry of the plume. Furthermore, extracting information about a plume from a pixelated image requires an additional level of interpretation. In this study, we use moment-based rather than pixel-based parameterization to invert for plume geometry. If we assume a simple Gaussian-shaped plume perturbing the initial background conductivity model, then we can acquire plume location, size, and conductivity value directly from the inversion. Neither regularization nor pixel image interpretation is required. Since we have reduced the dimensionality to only a few model parameters, we are able to explicitly calculate the Jacobian matrix, or the sensitivity of ERT data to model perturbations. If the rows of the Jacobian are independent, each plume moment parameter can be determined uniquely from the data; if they are not independent, parameters can be combined, further reducing dimensionality. By finding the Jacobian with the most independent rows, we can optimize the survey design for plume monitoring.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86159", "section":"Near Surface Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86160" } }
{"authors":"Fabricio Caxito::UFMG Federal University of Minas Gerais--Gabriel Uhlein::UFMG Federal University of Minas Gerais--Alcides Sial::UFPE Federal University of Pernambuco--Alexandre Uhlein::UFMG Federal University of Minas Gerais--", "title":"PP33B-2301: Carbon and Oxygen Isotope Stratigraphy of the Ediacaran Jaíba Formation, Upper Bambuí Group, Brazil: Insights into Paleogeography and Sedimentary Environments after a Neoproterozoic Glaciation.", "abstract":"The Neoproterozoic Era was a time of extreme climatic variation as recorded in sedimentary rocks of this age across the globe, leading to a number of controversial hypotheses (e.g. the Snowball Earth glaciations). In eastern Brazil, the Bambuí Gr. is a thick carbonatic-siliciclastic unit that covers the São Francisco Craton and preserves remnants of a Neoproterozoic glaciation and their respective cap carbonate (1). Recent findings of Cloudina in the Januária region (2) suggest that at least part of the sequence might be upper Ediacaran or even Cambrian. Here we present the first carbon-oxygen isotope data for the Jaíba Fm., a ca. 50 m thick carbonate unit that occurs in the topmost portion of the Bambuí Gr. in this same region. The Jaíba Fm. post-dates the cap carbonate sequence and the fossil-bearing layers, and thus was probably deposited in the Ediacaran-Cambrian transition. Three stratigraphic columns were analyzed, and yielded similar ratios. Values of δ13CVPDB are between 0.8 and 3.4 ‰, while δ18OVPDB values are mostly around -8 ‰. These values contrasts with the negative δ13C values found for the base of the Bambuí Gr., followed by highly positive δ13C (up to +14‰) on its middle portion. The unusually high δ13C values are commonly interpreted as evidence for deposition on a restricted basin, such as in a foreland setting. The return to values which are close to the PDB standard in the uppermost Bambuí Gr. might thus indicate a change in the paleogeography and tectonic environment of the basin, suggesting an open, ventilated environment along with a recovery of the biological and hydrological cycle after a Late Neoproterozoic glaciation. Ongoing detailed sedimentological, geochemical and isotopic work might help to further clarify these issues and to provide new clues for unraveling Late Neoproterozoic paleoclimate, paleogeography and ocean chemistry. We thank FAPEMIG (Brazil) for finnacial support through grants n. APQ-00914-14 and PPM-00539-15. (1) Caxito, F.A. et al., 2012. Precambrian Research, 200:38-58. (2) Warren, L. et al., 2014. Geology, 42:391-394.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86160", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86161" } }
{"authors":"Xiaoming HU::Sun Yat-Sen University--Song Yang::Sun Yat-Sen University--Ming Cai::Florida State University--", "title":"A33A-0120: Contrasting the Eastern Pacific El Niño and the Central Pacific El Niño: Process-based Feedback Attribution", "abstract":"This paper examines the roles of the radiative and non-radiative air-sea coupled thermodynamic processes in modifying the SST anomalies driven by air-sea coupled oceanic dynamic processes. This helps to isolate their contributions to the key differences between the Eastern Pacific (EP) El Niño and the Central Pacific (CP) El Niño. The attribution is achieved by decomposing sea surface temperature (SST) anomalies into partial SST anomalies due to individual processes using a coupled atmosphere-surface climate feedback-responses analysis method. Oceanic processes induce warming from the central to the eastern equatorial Pacific and cooling over the western basin with the maximum warming center in the central Pacific for both types of El Niño. The processes that act to oppose the oceanic process-induced SST anomalies are surface latent flux, sensible heat flux, cloud, and atmospheric dynamic feedbacks. The cooling due to each of the four negative-feedback processes is strongest in the region where the initial warming due to oceanic processes is maximum. Water vapor feedback is the sole process that acts to enhance the initial warming induced by oceanic processes. The increase of atmospheric water vapor over the eastern Pacific is much stronger for EP El Niño than CP El Niño. Therefore, it is the strong water vapor feedback over the eastern Pacific together with the strong negative feedbacks over the central equatorial Pacific that helps to relocate the maximum warming center from the central Pacific to the eastern basin for EP El Niño.This paper examines the roles of the radiative and non-radiative air-sea coupled thermodynamic processes in modifying the SST anomalies driven by air-sea coupled oceanic dynamic processes. This helps to isolate their contributions to the key differences between the Eastern Pacific (EP) El Niño and the Central Pacific (CP) El Niño. The attribution is achieved by decomposing sea surface temperature (SST) anomalies into partial SST anomalies due to individual processes using a coupled atmosphere-surface climate feedback-responses analysis method. Oceanic processes induce warming from the central to the eastern equatorial Pacific and cooling over the western basin with the maximum warming center in the central Pacific for both types of El Niño. The processes that act to oppose the oceanic process-induced SST anomalies are surface latent flux, sensible heat flux, cloud, and atmospheric dynamic feedbacks. The cooling due to each of the four negative-feedback processes is strongest in the region where the initial warming due to oceanic processes is maximum. Water vapor feedback is the sole process that acts to enhance the initial warming induced by oceanic processes. The increase of atmospheric water vapor over the eastern Pacific is much stronger for EP El Niño than CP El Niño. Therefore, it is the strong water vapor feedback over the eastern Pacific together with the strong negative feedbacks over the central equatorial Pacific that helps to relocate the maximum warming center from the central Pacific to the eastern basin for EP El Niño.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86161", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86162" } }
{"authors":"Carla Gavilan::University of Florida--Sabine Grunwald::University of Florida--Roberto Quiroz::International Potato Center--Likai Zhu::University of Wisconsin Madison--", "title":"B43I-0673: Modeling Soil Organic Carbon Variation Along Climatic and Topographic Trajectories in the Central Andes", "abstract":"The Andes represent the largest and highest mountain range in the tropics. Geological and climatic differentiation favored landscape and soil diversity, resulting in ecosystems adapted to very different climatic patterns. Although several studies support the fact that the Andes are a vast sink of soil organic carbon (SOC) only few have quantified this variable in situ. Estimating the spatial distribution of SOC stocks in data-poor and/or poorly accessible areas, like the Andean region, is challenging due to the lack of recent soil data at high spatial resolution and the wide range of coexistent ecosystems. Thus, the sampling strategy is vital in order to ensure the whole range of environmental covariates (EC) controlling SOC dynamics is represented. This approach allows grasping the variability of the area, which leads to more efficient statistical estimates and improves the modeling process. The objectives of this study were to i) characterize and model the spatial distribution of SOC stocks in the Central Andean region using soil-landscape modeling techniques, and to ii) validate and evaluate the model for predicting SOC content in the area. For that purpose, three representative study areas were identified and a suite of variables including elevation, mean annual temperature, annual precipitation and Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), among others, was selected as EC. A stratified random sampling (namely conditioned Latin Hypercube) was implemented and a total of 400 sampling locations were identified. At all sites, four composite topsoil samples (0-30 cm) were collected within a 2 m radius. SOC content was measured using dry combustion and SOC stocks were estimated using bulk density measurements. Regression Kriging was used to map the spatial variation of SOC stocks. The accuracy, fit and bias of SOC models was assessed using a rigorous validation assessment. This study produced the first comprehensive, geospatial SOC stock assessment in this undersampled region that serves as a baseline reference to assess potential impacts of climate and land use change.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86162", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86163" } }
{"authors":"Nate Stone::Organization Not Listed--Barbara Lafuente::University of Arizona--Robert Downs::University of Arizona--Thomas Bristow::NASA Ames Research Center--David Blake::NASA Ames Research Center--Mark Fonda::NASA Ames Research Center--Alex Pires::University of Arizona--", "title":"IN21E-03: The Open Data Repository’s Data Publisher", "abstract":"Data management and data publication are becoming increasingly important components of research workflows. The complexity of managing data, publishing data online, and archiving data has not decreased significantly even as computing access and power has greatly increased. The Open Data Repository’s Data Publisher software ( http://www.opendatarepository.org ) strives to make data archiving, management, and publication a standard part of a researcher’s workflow using simple, web-based tools and commodity server hardware. The publication engine allows for uploading, searching, and display of data with graphing capabilities and downloadable files. Access is controlled through a robust permissions system that can control publication at the field level and can be granted to the general public or protected so that only registered users at various permission levels receive access. Data Publisher also allows researchers to subscribe to meta-data standards through a plugin system, embargo data publication at their discretion, and collaborate with other researchers through various levels of data sharing. As the software matures, semantic data standards will be implemented to facilitate machine reading of data and each database will provide a REST application programming interface for programmatic access. Additionally, a citation system will allow snapshots of any data set to be archived and cited for publication while the data itself can remain living and continuously evolve beyond the snapshot date. The software runs on a traditional LAMP (Linux, Apache, MySQL, PHP) server and is available on GitHub ( http://github.com/opendatarepository ) under a GPLv2 open source license. The goal of the Open Data Repository is to lower the cost and training barrier to entry so that any researcher can easily publish their data and ensure it is archived for posterity. We gratefully acknowledge the support for this study by the Science-Enabling Research Activity (SERA), and NASA NNX11AP82A, Mars Science Laboratory Investigations and University of Arizona Geosciences.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86163", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86164" } }
{"authors":"Baehyun Min::University of Texas at Austin--Azor Nwachukwu::University of Texas at Austin--Sanjay Srinivasan::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--Mary Wheeler::University of Texas at Austin--", "title":"H53H-1769: Model Selection Coupled with a Particle Tracking Proxy Using Surface Deformation Data for Monitoring CO2 Plume Migration", "abstract":"This study formulates a framework of a model selection that refines geological models for monitoring CO2 plume migration. Special emphasis is placed on CO2 injection, and the particular techniques that are used for this study including model selection, particle tracking proxies, and partial coupling of flow and geomechanics. The proposed process starts with generating a large initial ensemble of reservoir models that reflect a prior uncertainty in reservoir description, including all plausible geologic scenarios. These models are presumed to be conditioned to available static data. In the absence of production or injection data, all prior reservoir models are regarded as equiprobable. Thus, the model selection algorithm is applied to select a few representative reservoir models that are more consistent with observed dynamic responses. A quick assessment of the models must then be performed to evaluate their dynamic characteristics and flow connectivity. This approach develops a particle tracking proxy and a finite element method solver for solving the flow equation and the stress problem, respectively. The shape of CO2 plume is estimated using a particle-tracking proxy that serves as a fast approximation of finite-difference simulation models. Sequentially, a finite element method solver is coupled with the proxy for analyzing geomechanical effects resulting from CO2 injection. A method is then implemented to group the models into clusters based on similarities in the estimated responses. The posterior model set is chosen as the cluster that produces the minimum deviation from the observed field data. The efficacy of non-dominated sorting based on Pareto-optimality is also tested in the current model selection framework. The proposed scheme is demonstrated on a carbon sequestration project in Algeria. Coupling surface deformation data with well injection data enhances the efficiency of tracking the CO2 plume. Therefore, this algorithm provides a probabilistic approach to assessing the migration of the CO2 plume in the aquifer and quantifying the risk associated with sequestration projects. Iterating the selection of clusters can further refine the forecasts of CO2 plume migration.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86164", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86165" } }
{"authors":"Dane Zielinski::Pomona College--Maria Prokopenko::University of Southern California--Kristin Bergmann::Harvard University--Robert Gaines::Pomona College--Frank Corsetti::University of Southern California--", "title":"PP33E-08: Primary Ediacaran Ooid Formation Texture Changes as an Indicator of Shifts in Local Shallow-Sea Chemistry: Exploring Diagenetic Effects on Preservation of Carbonate Associated Nitrate in the Johnnie Formation, Death Valley, California", "abstract":"We examined a stratigraphic section of the Johnnie Oolite containing a large Ediacaran negative d13C excursion to evaluate potential effects of diagenesis on Carbonate Associated Nitrate (CAN). Previously, high concentrations of CAN have been determined in this carbonate sequence, potentially pointing to a large perturbation in the marine nitrogen cycle prior to the onset of the d13C excursion. The main source of nitrate within the ocean comes from oxidation of biologically fixed nitrogen. Nitrate enters the carbonate mineral lattice in trace quantities, and may serve as a proxy for the degree of ocean oxygenation as well as for the concentration of fixed nitrogen in the environment. Until now no work has been done to address potential diagenetic alteration of the CAN concentrations. Here we conducted a comparative study between a set of redox-sensitive trace metals, carbonate textures and CAN concentrations in order to place some initial constraints on the extent of diagenetic processes, and in doing so to determine whether the CAN signal within the Johnnie Oolite is primary. We found no clear relationship between CAN and any considered diagenetic markers, pointing to a likely primary nature of the CAN signature. Furthermore, examination of the properties of the ooids that form the rock revealed potential indications of primary environmental changes recorded within the Johnnie Oolite. Ooids are known to form by two distinct mechanisms, which produce either tangential-concentric ooids or radial. Focusing on a single ~3 m stratigraphic section, the North Springs Mountains area, we found a clear shift from tangential-concentric formation at the base to radial formation near the top, with a distinct change occurring between 2-2.5 m. The distinction between ooid formation mechanisms is often thought to be governed by changes in the turbidity of their shallow depositional environments; however, the lack of any marked changes in sedimentary sorting point to a chemical influence in this case. Observed correlations between ooid formation texture and d13C values support this conclusion, and further point towards some distinct shift in the local paleocean chemistry, apparently occurring at the time of substantial changes in CAN content recorded within the rocks.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86165", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86166" } }
{"authors":"Michael Brown::CUNY City College--Marco Tedesco::CUNY City College of New York--Laurence Smith::University of California Los Angeles--Asa Rennermalm::Rutgers University New Brunswick--Kang Yang::University of California Los Angeles--", "title":"C51B-0725: Intra- and Inter-Seasonal Supra-glacial Water Variability over the West Greenland Ice Sheet as Estimated from Combining High Resolution Satellite Optical Data and a Digital Elevation Model", "abstract":"The supra-glacial hydrology of the Greenland Ice Sheet (GrIS) plays a crucial role on the surface energy and mass balance budgets of the ice sheet as a whole. The surface hydrology network variability of small streams in the ablation zone of Greenland is poorly understood both spatially and temporally. Using satellites that can spatially resolve the presence and associated properties of small streams, the scientific community is now able to be provided with accurate spatial and temporal analysis of surface hydrology on the ice sheet (that could not have been resolved with other sensors such as those on board MODIS or LANDSAT). In this study we report mapped supra-glacial water networks over a region of the West GrIS (approximately 164 km2) derived from high resolution multispectral satellite imagery from the Quickbird and WorldView – 2 satellites in tandem with a 2 meter stereographic SETSM DEM (digital elevation model). The branching complexity of the identified surface streams is computed from the available DEM as well as the intra- and inter seasonal changes observed in the hydrological system. The stream networks created during the melt season (at several different stages of melting) are compared and discussed as well as the networks mapped between consecutive years for proximate dates. Also, depth and volume estimations for the surface water features identified were extracted via band math algorithms, threshold classifications, and morphological operations. Our results indicate that the higher stream orders have the largest amount of stored surface water per km but the lower stream orders, specifically 1st order with widths of ~ 2 meters, hold more stored surface water overall. We also employ and compare runoff data from the numerical model MAR (Modèle Atmosphérique Régional) to the estimations found using imagery and the DEM.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86166", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86167" } }
{"authors":"Jennifer Pickering::Vanderbilt University--Céline Grall::Columbia University of New York--Volkhard Spiess::University of Bremen--Tilmann Schwenk::University of Bremen--Luisa Palamenghi::University of Bremen--Ryan Sincavage::Vanderbilt University--Michael Diamond::Vanderbilt University--Steven Goodbred::Vanderbilt University--", "title":"EP41A-0907: Effects of Neotectonic Deformation on Channel Planform and Avulsion History of the Brahmaputra-Jamuna River, Bangladesh", "abstract":"Holocene sediments of the Brahmaputra-Jamuna River in the upper delta plain of the Bengal basin unconformably overlie latest Pleistocene alluvium. Previously drilled borehole data reveal that the unconformity is marked by a basal gravel unit of early Holocene age with boulders up to 30-cm in diameter atop a compacted but unlithified sand and gravel conglomerate (D50=0.6mm) of latest Pleistocene age. We tie these borehole data to a 2D marine multichannel seismic survey along a 255-km reach of the Brahmaputra-Jamuna River, the first survey to image the lowstand valley from the India-Bangladesh border to the confluence with the Ganges (Padma) River. A prominent reflector is imaged along the length of the survey demarcating the valley base and Holocene-Pleistocene unconformity, sloping from ~40m below water level upstream to ~90m below water level at the downstream confluence. The average slope of this paleosurface is ~3x steeper than that of the modern channel bed, which may be the result of lower base level and propagation of a low-relief knickpoint during the last glacial lowstand. Alternatively or in conjunction, the steeper channel gradient may be due to increased basinward subsidence. In addition, the lowstand reflector is tectonically deformed at multiple locations, defining 4 distinct tectonic domains along the length of the survey. We place these tectonic influences on the stream channel in the context of its avulsion history during the Holocene, with evidence that the most recent avulsion of the Old Brahmaputra into the modern Jamuna course ~200ya was induced by tectonic uplift along the western margin of the Shillong Massif (Meghalaya, India). We further propose locations of the modern river that may be affected by tectonically-induced planform changes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86167", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86168" } }
{"authors":"Zhuowei Chen::Wuhan University--Liangsheng Shi::Wuhan University--Ming Ye::Florida State University--", "title":"H41B-1293: Global Sensitivity Analysis for Multiple Scenarios and Models of Nitrogen Processes", "abstract":"Modeling nitrogen process in soil is a long-lasting challenge partly because of the uncertainties from parameters, models and scenarios. It may be difficult to identify a suitable model and its corresponding parameters.This study assesses the global sensitivity indices for parameters of multiple models and scenarios on nitrogen processes. The majority of existing nitrogen dynamics models consider nitrification and denitrification as a first-order decay process or a Michaelis-Menten model, while various reduction functions are used to reflect the impact of environmental soil conditions. To determine the model uncertainty, 9 alternative models were designed based on NP2D model in this study. These models have the similar descriptions of nitrogen process but are different in the cal reduction functions of soil water and temperature. A global sensitivity analysis of each models under various scenarios was evaluated. Results show that in our synthetic cases of nitrogen transport and transformation, the global sensitivity indices vary between each models and scenarios. Larger indices for parameters of nitrification are obtained than the ones of denitrification in 6 models, while an inverse relationship is revealed in the rest 3 models. Parameters of soil temperature reduction functions are more sensitive than those of soil water reduction functions. When the soil water and temperature increase separately or together, parameters of denitrification gain their sensitivity, but the indices for parameters of soil temperature reduction functions decrease simultaneously. Our results indicate that identifying important parameters may be biased if ignoring the model and scenario uncertainties. This problem can be resolved by using the global sensitivity indices for multiple models and multiple scenarios. The new indices is useful to determine the relative contributions from different models and scenarios.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86168", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86169" } }
{"authors":"Joanne Emerson::Ohio State University Main Campus--Ruth Varner::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Joel Johnson::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Akosua Owusu-Dommey::University of Arizona--Morgan Binder::University of Arizona--Ben Woodcroft::University of Queensland--Martin Wik::Stockholm University--Nancy Freitas::University of Arizona--Joel Boyd::University of Queensland--Patrick Crill::Stockholm University--Scott Saleska::University of Arizona--Gene Tyson::University of Queensland--Virginia Rich::Ohio State University Main Campus--", "title":"B21C-0454: Linking Sediment Microbial Communities to Carbon Cycling in High-Latitude Lakes", "abstract":"It is well recognized that thawing permafrost peatlands are likely to provide a positive feedback to climate change via CH4 and CO2 emissions. High-latitude lakes in these landscapes have also been identified as sources of CH4 and CO2 loss to the atmosphere. To investigate microbial contributions to carbon loss from high-latitude lakes, we characterized sediment geochemistry and microbiota via cores collected from deep and shallow regions of two lakes (Inre Harrsjön and Mellersta Harrsjön) in Arctic Sweden in July, 2012. These lakes are within the Stordalen Mire long-term ecological area, a focal site for investigating the impacts of climate change-related permafrost thaw, and the lakes in this area are responsible for ~55% of the CH4 loss from this hydrologically interconnected system. Across 40 samples from 4 to 40 cm deep within four sediment cores, Illumina 16S rRNA gene sequencing revealed that the sedimentary microbiota was dominated by candidate phyla OP9 and OP8 (Atribacteria and Aminicenantes, respectively, including putative fermenters and anaerobic respirers), predicted methanotrophic Gammaproteobacteria, and predicted methanogenic archaea from the Thermoplasmata Group E2 clade. We observed some overlap in community structure with nearby peatlands, which tend to be dominated by methanogens and Acidobacteria. Sediment microbial communities differed significantly between lakes, by overlying lake depth (shallow vs. deep), and by depth within a core, with each trend corresponding to parallel differences in biogeochemical measurements. Overall, our results support the potential for significant microbial controls on carbon cycling in high-latitude lakes associated with thawing permafrost, and ongoing metagenomic analyses of focal samples will yield further insight into the functional potential of these microbial communities and their dominant members.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86169", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86170" } }
{"authors":"Margit Haberreiter::PMOD WRC Physical Meteorological Observatory Davos and World Radiation Center--Nuno Guerreiro::PMOD WRC Physical Meteorological Observatory Davos and World Radiation Center--Viggo Hansteen::Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics--Werner Schmutz::PMOD WRC Physical Meteorological Observatory Davos and World Radiation Center--", "title":"SH31C-2442: Characterisation of small-scale heating events in the solar atmosphere from 3D MHD simulations and their potential role in coronal heating", "abstract":"The physical mechanism that heats the solar corona is one of the still open science questions in solar physics. One of the proposed mechanism for coronal heating are nanoflares. To investigate their role in coronal heating we study the properties of the small-scale heating events in the solar atmosphere using 3D MHD simulations. We present a method to identify and track these heating events in time which allows us to study their life time, energy, and spectral signatures. These spectal signatures will be compared with available spectrosopic observations obtained with IRIS and SUMER. Ultimately, these results will be important for the coordinated scientific exploitation of SPICE and EUI along with other instruments onboard Solar Orbiter to address the coronal heating problem.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86170", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86171" } }
{"authors":"Troy Thornberry::NOAA Boulder--Andrew Rollins::NOAA Boulder--Thaopaul Bui::NASA Ames Research Center--Leonhard Pfister::NASA Ames Research Center--Ru-Shan Gao::NOAA Boulder--", "title":"A13C-0354: A comparison of ATTREX H2O observations in the TTL with values derived from reanalysis-based back trajectories", "abstract":"Despite very low mixing ratios relative to the troposphere, water vapor in the lower stratosphere (LS) plays a significant role in Earth’s radiative balance and climate system, and is an important constituent in stratospheric chemistry. The low H2O content of air entering the LS is established to first order by dehydration processes controlled by the cold temperatures of the tropical tropopause layer (TTL), especially over the western Pacific. Global climate models rely on parameterizations in order to simulate TTL dehydration processes and calculate the amount of H2O transported into the stratosphere. Here we present an analysis of in situ water vapor measurements in the western Pacific TTL from the NASA ATTREX campaign and compare them to reanalysis-based back trajectory calculations of LS H2O in order to investigate the efficiency of TTL dehydration processes and provide constraints on the representation of TTL dehydration in reanalyses and global models.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86171", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86172" } }
{"authors":"Tomoaki Miura::Univ Hawaii--Anna Kato::University of Hawaii at Manoa--Jiao Wang::University of Hawaii at Manoa--Marco Vargas::NOAA-NESDIS--Mahany Lindquist::University of Hawaii at Manoa--", "title":"B42A-07: Validation of Vegetation Index Time Series from Suomi NPP Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite Using Tower Radiation Flux Measurements", "abstract":"Satellite vegetation index (VI) time series data serve as an important means to monitor and characterize seasonal changes of terrestrial vegetation and their interannual variability. It is, therefore, critical to ensure quality of such VI products and one method of validating VI product quality is cross-comparison with in situ flux tower measurements. In this study, we evaluated the quality of VI time series derived from Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) onboard the Suomi National Polar-orbiting Partnership (NPP) spacecraft by cross-comparison with in situ radiation flux measurements at select flux tower sites over North America and Europe. VIIRS is a new polar-orbiting satellite sensor series, slated to replace National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer in the afternoon overpass and to continue the highly-calibrated data streams initiated with Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrometer of National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s Earth Observing System. The selected sites covered a wide range of biomes, including croplands, grasslands, evergreen needle forest, woody savanna, and open shrublands. The two VIIRS indices of the Top-of-Atmosphere (TOA) Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) and the atmospherically-corrected, Top-of-Canopy (TOC) Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI) (daily, 375 m spatial resolution) were compared against the TOC NDVI and a two-band version of EVI (EVI2) calculated from tower radiation flux measurements, respectively. VIIRS and Tower VI time series showed comparable seasonal profiles across biomes with statistically significant correlations (> 0.60; p-value < 0.01). “Start-of-season (SOS)” phenological metric values extracted from VIIRS and Tower VI time series were also highly compatible (R2 > 0.95), with mean differences of 2.3 days and 5.0 days for the NDVI and the EVI, respectively. These results indicate that VIIRS VI time series can capture seasonal evolution of vegetated land surface as good as in situ radiometric measurements. Future studies that address biophysical or physiological interpretations of Tower VI time series derived from radiation flux measurements are desirable.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86172", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86173" } }
{"authors":"Nathan Niemi::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Marin Clark::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Petr Yakovlev::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--", "title":"T41A-2872: Evidence for Rapid Post-Pliocene Exhumation of the Santa Monica Mountains, California, from Apatite (U-Th)/He Thermochronometry", "abstract":"Potential losses related to large earthquakes on blind or previously unrecognized thrust faults is of significant concern to southern California, where numerous individual mountain ranges are underlain by active faults. Some of the most hazardous thrust fault systems in Southern California are associated with high-slip-rate faults in the northern portion of the western Transverse Ranges, while the southern region is generally considered to be less seismically active. Determining slip rates on faults bounding the Santa Monica Mountains has been challenging, in part because many of the faults that underlie the range have submarine surface traces. Existing geologic studies predict that these faults slip relatively slowly; however, recent GPS models predict a band of relatively fast contraction on faults that lie beneath the Santa Monica Mountains (Marshall et al., 2013). These geodetic models suggest unrecognized hazard associated with shortening and vertical uplift of this range. Late Cenozoic strata in the central Santa Monica Mountains are of sufficient thickness to bury Cretaceous and Paleocene strata above the closure temperature for apatite (U-Th)/He thermochronometry (~70°C). As a result, these older rocks, now exposed in the southern Santa Monica Mountains, may record exhumation associated with fault slip and associated structural deformation of the range. Preliminary apatite (U-Th)/He ages near Las Flores Canyon span from 3.5 to 6.5 Ma, and are the youngest apatite (U-Th)/He ages we are aware of in southern California outside of the transpressional San Andreas system. When plotted as depth beneath the base of the marine Modelo Formation, an inflection in age/depth gradient at 4 Ma is inferred to reflect the onset of fault motion and is consistent with the late Miocene age of the Modelo Formation. Based on average geothermal gradients for the Ventura and Los Angeles basins and an assumed thrust fault dip of 20°, observed apparent exhumation rates are consistent with ~ 2 mm/yr dip slip motion on a thrust fault beneath the Santa Monica Mountains. The results from this study are consistent with geodetic models of high slip rates beneath the Santa Monica Mountains and thus refine our understanding of seismic hazard in southern California.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86173", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86174" } }
{"authors":"Selina Chu::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Giuseppe Totaro::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory Sapienza University of Rome--Nipurn Doshi::Indiana University Bloomington NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Shivika Thapar::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory Indiana University Bloomington--Chris Mattmann::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Paul Ramirez::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"IN34A-07: Document Exploration and Automatic Knowledge Extraction for Unstructured Biomedical Text", "abstract":"We describe our work on building a web-browser based document reader with built-in exploration tool and automatic concept extraction of medical entities for biomedical text. Vast amounts of biomedical information are offered in unstructured text form through scientific publications and R&D reports. Utilizing text mining can help us to mine information and extract relevant knowledge from a plethora of biomedical text. The ability to employ such technologies to aid researchers in coping with information overload is greatly desirable. In recent years, there has been an increased interest in automatic biomedical concept extraction [1, 2] and intelligent PDF reader tools with the ability to search on content and find related articles [3]. Such reader tools are typically desktop applications and are limited to specific platforms. Our goal is to provide researchers with a simple tool to aid them in finding, reading, and exploring documents. Thus, we propose a web-based document explorer, which we called Shangri-Docs, which combines a document reader with automatic concept extraction and highlighting of relevant terms. Shangri-Docsalso provides the ability to evaluate a wide variety of document formats (e.g. PDF, Words, PPT, text, etc.) and to exploit the linked nature of the Web and personal content by performing searches on content from public sites (e.g. Wikipedia, PubMed) and private cataloged databases simultaneously. Shangri-Docsutilizes Apache cTAKES (clinical Text Analysis and Knowledge Extraction System) [4] and Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) to automatically identify and highlight terms and concepts, such as specific symptoms, diseases, drugs, and anatomical sites, mentioned in the text. cTAKES was originally designed specially to extract information from clinical medical records. Our investigation leads us to extend the automatic knowledge extraction process of cTAKES for biomedical research domain by improving the ontology guided information extraction process. We will describe our experience and implementation of our system and share lessons learned from our development. We will also discuss ways in which this could be adapted to other science fields. [1] Funk et al., 2014. [2] Kang et al., 2014. [3] Utopia Documents, http://utopiadocs.com [4] Apache cTAKES, http://ctakes.apache.org", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86174", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86175" } }
{"authors":"Clayton Myers::Princeton University--Masaaki Yamada::Princeton University--Hantao Ji::Princeton University--Jongsoo Yoo::Princeton University--William Fox::Princeton University--Jonathan Jara-Almonte::Princeton University--Antonia Savcheva::Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics--Edward DeLuca::SAO--", "title":"SH13A-2434: Laboratory Identification of MHD Eruption Criteria in the Solar Corona", "abstract":"Ideal magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) instabilities such as the kink [1] and torus [2] instabilities are believed to play an important role in driving “storage-and-release” eruptions in the solar corona. These instabilities act on long-lived, arched magnetic flux ropes that are “line-tied” to the solar surface. In spite of numerous observational and computational studies, the conditions under which these instabilities produce an eruption remain a subject of intense debate. In this paper, we use a line-tied, arched flux rope experiment to study storage-and-release eruptions in the laboratory [3]. An in situ array of miniature magnetic probes is used to assess the equilibrium and stability of the laboratory flux ropes. Two major results are reported here: First, a new stability regime is identified where torus-unstable flux ropes fail to erupt. In this “failed torus” regime, the flux rope is torus-unstable but kink-stable. Under these conditions, a dynamic “toroidal field tension force” surges in magnitude and causes the flux rope to contract. This tension force, which is missing from existing eruption models, is the J×B force between self-generated poloidal currents in the flux rope and the toroidal (guide) component of the vacuum field. Secondly, a clear torus instability threshold is observed in the kink-unstable regime. This latter result, which is consistent with existing theoretical [4] and numerical [5] findings, verifies the key role of the torus instability in driving some solar eruptions. This research is supported by DoE Contract No. DE-AC02-09CH11466 and by the NSF/DoE Center for Magnetic Self-Organization (CMSO). [1] Hood & Priest, Geophys. Astrophys. Fluid Dynamics 17, 297 (1981) [2] Kliem & Török, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 255002 (2006) [3] Myers, Ph.D. Thesis, Princeton University (2015) [4] Olmedo & Zhang, Astrophys. J. 718, 433 (2010) [5] Török & Kliem, Astrophys. J. 630, L97 (2005)", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86175", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86176" } }
{"authors":"Robert MacDowall::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Thejappa Golla::University of Maryland College Park--Michael Reiner::Catholic University of America--William Farrell::NASA Goddard SFC--", "title":"P41B-2074: Multi-parameter Correlation of Jovian Radio Emissions with Solar Wind and Interplanetary Magnetic Field Data", "abstract":"Variability of the numerous varieties of Jovian radio emission has been associated with aspects of solar wind (SW) and interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) parameters outside the magnetosphere. Here we demonstrate multiple-parameter correlations that relate each of several Jovian emissions, including bKOM and quasi-periodic bursts, to the SW and IMF impacting the Jovian magnetosphere. The data used are from the Ulysses spacecraft with radio data from the Unified Radio and Plasma wave (URAP) instrument, which provides high-quality remote radio observations of the Jovian emissions. The URAP observations are correlated with SW and IMF data from the relevant instruments on Ulysses, propagated to the nose of the Jovian magnetosphere with a sophisticated code. Because the aphelion of the Ulysses orbit was at the Jovian distance from the Sun, Ulysses spent ample time near Jupiter in 1991-1992 and 2003-2004, which are the intervals analyzed. Our results can be inverted such that radio observations by a Jovian orbiter, such as Cassini or Juno, are able to identify SW/IMF changes based on the behavior of the radio emissions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86176", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86177" } }
{"authors":"Sheila Werth::University of Massachusetts Amherst--Stephen Frasier::University of Massachusetts Amherst--", "title":"GC53E-1257: CORRELATING FLIGHT BEHAVIOR AND RADAR MEASUREMENTS FOR SPECIES BASED CLASSIFICATION OF BIRD RADAR ECHOES FOR WIND ENERGY SITE ASSESSMENT", "abstract":"Wind energy is one of the fastest-growing segments of the world energy market, offering a clean and abundant source of electricity. However, wind energy facilities can have detrimental effects on wildlife, especially birds and bats. Monitoring systems based on marine navigation radar are often used to quantify migration near potential wind sites, but the ability to reliably distinguish between bats and different varieties of birds has not been practically achieved. This classification capability would enable wind site selection that protects more vulnerable species, such as bats and raptors. Flight behavior, such as wing beat frequency, changes in speed, or changes in orientation, are known to vary by species [1]. The ability to extract these properties from radar data could ultimately enable a species based classification scheme. In this work, we analyze the relationship between radar measurements and bird flight behavior in echoes from avifauna. During the 2014 fall migration season, the UMass dual polarized weather radar was used to collect low elevation observations of migrating birds as they traversed through a fixed antenna beam. The radar was run during the night time, in clear-air conditions. Data was coherently integrated, and detections of biological targets exceeding an SNR threshold were extracted. Detections without some dominant frequency content (i.e. clear periodicity, potentially the wing beat frequency) were removed from the sample in order to isolate observations suspected to contain a single species or bird. For the remaining detections, measurements including the polarimetric products and the Doppler spectrum were extracted at each time step over the duration of the observation. The periodic and time changing nature of some of these different measurements was found to have a strong correlation with flight behavior (i.e. flapping vs. gliding behavior). Assumptions about flight behavior and orientation were corroborated through scattering simulations of birds in flight. The presence of a strong correlation between certain radar measurements and flight behavior would suggest the potential for a broad, species based avian classification algorithm. Such a classification scheme could ultimately help select and monitor wind sites in order to minimize harm to at-risk bird and bat species.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86177", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86178" } }
{"authors":"Cholho Song::Korea University--Woo-Kyun Lee::Korea University--Seong Woo Jeon::Korea University--Teayeon Kim::Korea University--Chul-Hee Lim::Korea University--", "title":"PA21C-2174: Spatial Assessment of Forest Ecosystem Functions and Services using Human Relating Factors for SDG", "abstract":"Application of ecosystem service concept in environmental related decision making could be numerical and objective standard for policy maker between preserving and developing perspective of environment. However, pursuing maximum benefit from natural capital through ecosystem services caused failure by losing ecosystem functions through its trade-offs. Therefore, difference between ecosystem functions and services were demonstrated and would apply human relating perspectives. Assessment results of ecosystem functions and services can be divided 3 parts. Tree growth per year set as the ecosystem function factor and indicated through so called pure function map. After that, relating functions can be driven such as water conservation, air pollutant purification, climate change regulation, and timber production. Overall process and amount are numerically quantified. These functional results can be transferred to ecosystem services by multiplying economic unit value, so function reflecting service maps can be generated. On the other hand, above services, to implement more reliable human demand, human reflecting service maps are also be developed. As the validation, quantified ecosystem functions are compared with former results through pixel based analysis. Three maps are compared, and through comparing difference between ecosystem function and services and inversed trends in function based and human based service are analysed. In this study, we could find differences in PF, FRS, and HRS in relation to based ecosystem conditions. This study suggests that the differences in PF, FRS, and HRS should be understood in the decision making process for sustainable management of ecosystem services. Although the analysis is based on in sort existing process separation, it is important to consider the possibility of different usage of ecosystem function assessment results and ecosystem service assessment results in SDG policy making. Furthermore, process based functional approach can suggest environmental information which is reflected the other kinds of perspective.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86178", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86179" } }
{"authors":"Alessandro Baccini::Woods Hole Research Center--", "title":"B11A-0417: Satellites Based Annual Carbon Dynamics of Africa Tropical Vegetation During the 2003-2014 Period", "abstract":"Tracking terrestrial carbon fluxes and predicting how tropical forests will respond to continuous global change requires accurate estimates of annual changes in the density and distribution of carbon stocks at local to global scales. Existing evidence for tropical forests as a carbon sink is based on a limited number of repeated field measurements (Phillips et al. 1998,Lewis et al. 2009, Brienen et al. 2015), while spatially explicit estimates over large areas are limited to emissions derived from deforestation without being able to account for degradation and gain (Harris et al. 2012, Hansen et al. 2013). Here we use 12 years (2003-2014) of satellite data to quantify wall-to-wall annual net changes in aboveground carbon density, showing that Africa tropical forests are a net carbon source on the order of 72.1 ± 32.9 Tg C yr-1. This net release of carbon consists of losses of 205.0 ± 24.7 Tg C yr1 and gains of -132.9 ± 19.3 Tg C yr1. The net gains result from forest growth; net losses result from both reductions in forest area due to deforestation and in biomass density within forests due to degradation; this last accounting overall for 68.9 % of the losses. We anticipate several advantages over the traditional estimates. It measures carbon lost from forest degradation as well as from deforestation. It measures the gains of carbon in forest growth. Data are available to determine annual changes with associated uncertainty. The approach focuses directly on changes in carbon. While global emissions from fossil fuel stabilized in 2014 for the first time in the past 40 years, results from this study indicate that the annual rate of emissions from tropical forests has tended upward over the latest years of the 2003-2014 period.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86179", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86180" } }
{"authors":"Timothy Bartholomaus::University of Texas--Ginny Catania::University of Texas at Austin--Leigh Stearns::University of Kansas--Jake Walter::Institute for Geophysics--Emily Shroyer::Oregon State Univ--Jonathan Nash::Oregon State Univ--Dave Sutherland::University of Oregon--", "title":"C11C-0781: Recurring, year-round, icequakes at a Greenland tidewater glacier", "abstract":"Processes occurring at the interface between glaciers and their crystalline or sedimentary beds allow fast glacier flow and control short-term velocity variations. However, the inaccessibility of this interface limits our understanding of subglacial processes. Passive seismology allows for continuous, non-invasive monitoring of subglacial processes. At Kangerlussuup Sermia in the Uummannaq region of central west Greenland (71.5° N, 51.4° W), two years of passive seismic records reveal consistently recurring seismic events. The seismometer was buried in shallow sediment adjacent to the terminus of the 4.2 km-wide tidewater glacier, which flows 1.8 km/yr at its front. These recurring seismic events occur on average once per 55±15 s and last approximately 20 s, year-round. Events have peak frequencies between 1.0 and 1.5 Hz with characteristic, gamma-distributed amplitudes. Events are emergent, without clear P- or S-wave arrivals. Several of these event properties are shared with calving icequakes, such as emergent arrivals and frequencies near 1.5 Hz, however, the regular recurrence time and characteristic amplitudes are inconsistent with a calving source. These seismic event properties vary by several tens of percent during our record, on both monthly and daily timescales. Comparison between the properties of these seismic events and other time series, such as runoff and ice flow speed, allow us to assess the hypothesis that these seismic signals are icequakes produced by basal slip. We explore connections between these signatures of brittle/elastic failure of the ice-bed interface and components of the glacier force balance.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86180", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86182" } }
{"authors":"Nicolas Harrichhausen::McGill University--Christie Rowe::McGill University--Warwick Board::Pretivm Resources Inc--Charles Greig::Pretivm Resources Inc--", "title":"MR33C-2701: Relationship between amorphous silica and precious metal in quartz veins", "abstract":"Super-saturation of silica is common in fault fluids, due to pressure changes associated with fracture, fault slip, or temperature gradients in hydrothermal systems. These mechanisms lead to precipitation of amorphous silica, which will recrystallize to quartz under typical geologic conditions. These conditions may also promote the saturation of precious metals, such as gold, and the precipitation of nanoparticles. Previous experiments show that charged nanoparticles of gold can attach to the surface of amorphous silica nanoparticles. Thus, gold and silica may be transported as a colloid influencing mineralization textures during amorphous silica recrystallization to quartz. This may enrich quartz vein hosted gold deposits, but the instability of hydrous silica during subsequent deformation means that the microstructural record of precipitation of gold is lost. We investigate a recent, shallow auriferous hydrothermal system at Dixie Valley, Nevada to reveal the nano- to micro-scale relationships between gold and silica in fresh veins. Fault slip surfaces at Dixie Valley exhibit layers of amorphous silica with partial recrystallization to quartz. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) show amorphous silica can contain a few wt. % gold while areas recrystallized to quartz are barren. At the Jurassic Brucejack deposit in British Columbia, Canada we observe the cryptocrystalline quartz textures that may indicate recrystallization from amorphous silica within quartz-carbonate veins containing high grade gold. Comb quartz within syntaxial veins, vugs, and coating breccia clasts indicate structural dilation. Vein geometry is investigated to determine relative importance of fault slip in creating dilational sites. By comparing quartz-carbonate veins from the Dixie Valley to Brucejack, we can determine whether amorphous silica formed in different environments show similar potential to affect precious metal mineralization.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86182", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86183" } }
{"authors":"Jean Ometto::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Mercedes Bustamante::Universidade de Brasilia--Maria Forti::INPE National Institute for Space Research--Tibisay Peres::Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Cientificas--Ariel Stein::NOAA College Park--Victor Jaramillo::Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México--Cecilia Perez::Universidad de Chile--Patricia Pinho::USP University of Sao Paulo--Nataly Ascarrunz::Instituto Boliviano de Investigación Forestal--Amy Austin::University of Buenos Aires--Luiz Martinelli::Universidade de Sao Paulo--", "title":"B12E-07: Nitrogen Cycling In Latin America and : Drivers, Impacts And Vulnerabilities", "abstract":"Latin America is at a crossroads where a balance should be found between production of the major agricultural commodities, reasonable and planned urbanization and conservation of its natural ecosystems and associated goods and services. Most of the natural biological fixation of the globe occurs in forests of Latin America. On the other hand, Latin America has one of the highest rate of deforestation in the world, and one of the highest increases in the use of nitrogen fertilizers. A better understanding of the responses of the N cycle to human impacts will allow better conservation of biodiversity and natural resources, with an improvement in food security and more effective land use choices in biofuel development. Latin America is a unique region in multiple aspects, and particularly relevant for this proposal are the broad climatic gradient and economic patterns that include a diverse range of natural ecosystems and socio-economic development pathways. Additionally, the region is impaired by the lack of information on actual impacts of human activity on N cycling across this diverse range of ecosystems. Finally, the large expanse of tropical ecosystems and reservoirs of biodiversity juxtaposed with an intense economic incentive for development make our understanding of human impacts in this context particularly important for global change research in the region. An evaluation of current and predicted changes in climate and land use on nitrogen stocks and fluxes in the region what is being develop by the Nnet network (Nitrogen Cycling In Latin America: Drivers, Impacts And Vulnerabilities ). This presentation will bring the latest results of this integrative initiative in Latin America, focusing on the nitrogen budget associated to provision of ecosystem services and climate change.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86183", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86184" } }
{"authors":"Forrest Lacey::University of Colorado at Boulder--Daven Henze::University of Colorado at Boulder--Randall Martin::Dalhousie University--Colin Lee::Dalhousie University--Aaron van Donkelaar::Dalhousie University--Luke Reed::University of Colorado at Boulder--", "title":"A23N-03: Climate and health impacts of the shift from traditional solid cookstove fuels to modern energy sources", "abstract":"Globally, 2.8 million people use solid fuels for meal preparation. As regions in which solid fuel cooking is prevalent become more industrialized, this number will decrease leading to commensurate changes in greenhouse gas, aerosol and aerosol precursor emissions from the residential sector. Here we explore the impacts of this shift from traditional solid fuel use to equivalent energy sources from modern power generation on climate change and exposure to ambient air pollution. We use sensitivities calculated with the GEOS-Chem adjoint model, which allows us to estimate the climate and health impacts due to changes in atmospheric composition from grid-scale shifts in energy usage. Various scenarios for alternative energy generation sources are considered. Climate impacts are reported as changes in global averaged surface temperature through the use of absolute regional temperature potentials and health impacts are reported as changes in premature deaths calculated using changes in population-weighted PM2.5 concentrations combined with integrated exposure response functions. Global model PM2.5 surface concentrations are downscaled to improve exposure estimates through application of remotely sensed aerosol optical depth measurements. Our assessment of the impacts of fuel switching allows for estimates of upper and lower bounds, for both climate and health impacts, at the global and national scale. Baseline calculations using these methods estimate impacts of approximately 0.22 K warming and 217,000 premature deaths caused by changes in ambient air quality due to present day cookstove emissions which represents the base case for these comparisons. Overall, the results of this study provide important information to both individual country’s governments and non-governmental organizations that are targeting energy infrastructure improvements.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86184", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86185" } }
{"authors":"Ritvik Sahajpal::University of Maryland--", "title":"GC13A-1135: Spatially-explicit estimates of greenhouse-gas payback times for perennial cellulosic biomass production on open lands in the Lake States", "abstract":"The development of renewable energy sources is an integral step towards mitigating the carbon dioxide induced component of climate change. One important renewable source is plant biomass, comprising both food crops such as corn (Zea mays) and cellulosic biomass from short-rotation woody crops (SRWC) such as hybrid-poplar (Populus spp.) and Willow (Salix spp.). Due to their market acceptability and excellent energy balance, cellulosic feedstocks represent an abundant and if managed properly, a carbon-neutral and environmentally beneficial resource. We evaluate how site variability impacts the greenhouse-gas (GHG) benefits of SRWC plantations on lands potentially suited for bioenergy feedstock production in the Lake States (Minnesota, Wisconsin, Michigan). We combine high-resolution, spatially-explicit estimates of biomass, soil organic carbon and nitrous oxide emissions for SRWC plantations from the Environmental Policy Integrated Climate (EPIC) model along with life cycle analysis results from the GREET model to determine the greenhouse-gas payback time (GPBT) or the time needed before the GHG savings due to displacement of fossil fuels exceeds the initial losses from plantation establishment. We calibrate our models using unique yield and N2O emission data from sites across the Lake states that have been converted from pasture and hayfields to SRWC plantations. Our results show a reduction of 800,000 ha in non-agricultural open land availability for biomass production, a loss of nearly 37% (see attached figure). Overall, GPBTs range between 1 and 38 years, with the longest GPBTs occurring in the northern Lake states. Initial soil nitrate levels and site drainage potential explain more than half of the variation in GPBTs. Our results indicate a rapidly closing window of opportunity to establish a sustainable cellulosic feedstock economy in the Lake States.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86185", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86186" } }
{"authors":"Jing Jin::University of Delaware--Paul Imhoff::University of Delaware--Jing Tian::University of Delaware--Pei Chiu::University of Delaware--Mingxin Guo::Delaware State University--", "title":"B21B-0430: Biochar Addition to Stormwater Treatment Media for Enhanced Removal of Nitrogen", "abstract":"Urban stormwater management systems, such as bioretention facilities, require substantial land area and are often ineffective in removing nitrogen. This project seeks to improve nitrogen removal in bioretention media by modifying the hydraulic and treatment characteristics of the infiltration medium with biochar addition. A commercial wood biochar pyrolyzed from Southern Yellow Pine at 500°C was used. Laboratory experiments demonstrated that biochar addition to a typical bioretention medium (soil-mix: 4% saw dust, 88% sand, 8% clay) increased ammonium sorption at typical stormwater concentrations (2 mg/L) by a factor of 6, total porosity by 16.6%, and water retention at most matric potentials. The effect of the biochar-amended medium on nitrate removal was evaluated in pilot-scale experiments. Side-by-side experimental cells (91 cm dia., 1.2 m deep) were constructed to treat stormwater runoff from a parking lot. The control cell contained 100% soil mix while the biochar cell contained 4% biochar and 96% soil-mix by mass. Treatment media were 76.2 cm in depth and overlain by 5.1 cm of wood mulch in both cells, with a water table maintained at the bottom of the treatment zones. Cells were instrumented with TDR moisture sensors, pressure transducers, and redox and temperature sensors. Two pilot-scale experiments were conducted that included a bromide tracer and nitrate with a hydraulic loading of 5.5cm/h for 24 h in early spring and 36 h in summer. Effluent was continuously sampled for nitrogen compounds during these tests. Tracer tests and TDR measurements showed that biochar increased the average volumetric water content of the vadose zone by 14.7% and the mean residence time by 12.6%. For the spring field test at 14°C, nitrate in the control cell effluent increased by 6.1% but decreased by 43.5% for the biochar cell. For the summer field test at 22°C, 30.6% and 84.7% of influent nitrate was removed in the control and biochar cells, respectively. In the summer field test, total nitrogen in the influent was decreased by a factor of 5 in the biochar cell effluent and was primarily nitrate and ammonium. Nitrate removal in the medium amended with biochar was enhanced through improved redox conditions (lower gas saturations), longer hydraulic retention time, and increased microbial activity.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86186", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86188" } }
{"authors":"Bruce Daniels::University of California Santa Cruz--", "title":"H41A-1286: Resolution of Uncertainty Introduced by Missing Daily Precipitation Data and its Trends Usable for the Determination of Resulting Impacts on Hydrology Components", "abstract":"For this study, climate change information came from measurements of at least 85 years of daily observations gathered from 50 California locations. These records were used to calculate the long-term trends of three precipitation timing patterns. The state-wide trends found are that rain/snow events have been lasting longer, getting weaker, and the time between them has increased. The study then assumed that these three observed trends might continue for another 30 years. They were applied as future climate change for input to two water basins in California. The hydrology model for one basin in the snowy Sierras benefited from this future climate with 1/2 percent more streamflow. A basin on the central coast suffered 2.5 percent less recharge for water supply. Note that these impacts were derived from just the changes of the three precipitation timing patterns. No change in the total precipitation or temperature was included. Another key aspect of this study was statistical analysis for the proper derivation of trend values and their statistical significance even when there is missing data. In the precipitation observation data there was up to 7% of the daily values missing from the records. First was a demonstration that such missing data actually matters. This was shown by artificially injecting missing data into the long (138 years) and largely present (0.2%) Sacramento dataset. This injection caused the resulting trend values to be considerably different from their original true values. What worked was a multiple imputation imputation technique which produces a probability distribution for the missing data. The shape parameter for a suitable Weibull distribution was found through a fit to the plots of my three metrics of event Intensity, event Duration, and lull Pauses. Estimates for the missing data from each month and year were produced by taking averages from 0, 1, and 2 months on either side along with 0, … 11 years before and after that date. From these estimates was derived a scale parameter for the Weibull distribution to use for the missing data and the calculation of their trends. This was followed by use of a permutation and Monte Carlo technique to derive statistical confidence p-values for those trend values.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86188", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86189" } }
{"authors":"Youn-seo Koo::Anyang University--Hae-Kwan Cheong::Sungkyunkwan University--Daeryun Choi::---A Leum Kim::Anyang University--Hui-Young Yun::Anyang University--", "title":"A31B-0024: A hybrid modeling with data assimilation to evaluate human exposure level", "abstract":"Exposure models are designed to better represent human contact with PM (Particulate Matter) and other air pollutants such as CO, SO2, O3, and NO2. The exposure concentrations of the air pollutants to human are determined by global and regional long range transport of global and regional scales from Europe and China as well as local emissions from urban and road vehicle sources. To assess the exposure level in detail, the multiple scale influence from background to local sources should be considered. A hybrid air quality modeling methodology combing a grid-based chemical transport model with a local plume dispersion model was used to provide spatially and temporally resolved air quality concentration for human exposure levels in Korea. In the hybrid modeling approach, concentrations from a grid-based chemical transport model and a local plume dispersion model are added to provide contributions from photochemical interactions, long-range (regional) transport and local-scale dispersion. The CAMx (Comprehensive Air quality Model with Extensions was used for the background concentrations from anthropogenic and natural emissions in East Asia including Korea while the road dispersion by vehicle emission was calculated by CALPUFF model. The total exposure level of the pollutants was finally assessed by summing the background and road contributions. In the hybrid modeling, the data assimilation method based on the optimal interpolation was applied to overcome the discrepancies between the model predicted concentrations and observations. The air quality data from the air quality monitoring stations in Korea. The spatial resolution of the hybrid model was 50m for the Seoul Metropolitan Ares. This example clearly demonstrates that the exposure level could be estimated to the fine scale for the exposure assessment by using the hybrid modeling approach with data assimilation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86189", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86190" } }
{"authors":"Yuanjin Pan::Wuhan University--WenBin Shen::Wuhan University of Technology--Cheinway Hwang::National Chiao Tung University--", "title":"G33B-1145: Terrestrial water storage variations and surface vertical deformation derived from GPS and GRACE observations in Nepal and Himalayas", "abstract":"As an elastic Earth, the surface vertical deformation is in response to hydrological mass change on or near Earth’s surface. The continuous GPS (CGPS) records show surface vertical deformations which are significant information to estimate the variation of terrestrial water storage. We compute the loading deformations at GPS stations based on synthetic models of seasonal water load distribution and then invert the synthetic GPS data for surface mass distribution. We use GRACE gravity observations and hydrology models to evaluate seasonal water storage variability in Nepal and Himalayas. The coherence among GPS inversion results, GRACE and hydrology models indicate that GPS can provide quantitative estimates of terrestrial water storage variations by inverting the surface deformation observations. The annual peak-to-peak surface mass change derived from GPS and GRACE results reveal seasonal loads oscillations of water, snow and ice. Meanwhile, the present uplifting of Nepal and Himalayas indicates the hydrology mass loss. This study is supported by National 973 Project China (grant Nos. 2013CB733302 and 2013CB733305), NSFC (grant Nos. 41174011, 41429401, 41210006, 41128003, 41021061).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86190", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86191" } }
{"authors":"Eun Hye Kwon::Organization Not Listed--Hyun A Lee::KBSI Korea Basic Science Institute--Junseok Lee::KBSI Korea Basic Science Institute--Doyoung Kim::KBSI Korea Basic Science Institute--SangHoon Lee::Catholic University of Korea--Hye-On Yoon::KBSI Korea Basic Science Institute--", "title":"NH51D-1932: Characteristics of fluoride in pore-water at accidental hydrofluoric acid spillage site, Gumi, Korea", "abstract":"A leakage accident of hydrofluoric acid (HF) occurred in Gumi, South Korea at Sep. 2012. The study site is located in the borderline between a large-scale industrial complex and a rural area. The HF plume was made immediately, and moved toward the rural area through air. After the accident, 212 ha of farm land were influenced and most of crops were withered. To recover the soil, CaO was applied after six months. Although several studies have done to estimate the extension and movement of HF plume in the air and to assess the impact on human health or plant after the incident, the long-term fate of fluoride (F) in the affected soils is not identified clearly. Thus, this study aimed to understand the behavior of F in the soil after HF releasing from accident site through chemical analysis and geochemical modeling. Within the radius of 1 km of accident site, 16 pore-water and soil samples were collected. The semi-quantitative soil composition (i.e., Al, Ca, Fe, K, Mg, Mn, Na, P, Si, Ti), total F, total P, OM contents in soil, and soil pH have already been measured, and pore-water compositions are also identified. From these experimental and modeling data, we could be evaluate if impact of accident exists until now, and also could be select and identify existing form of fluoride in soil and pore-water.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86191", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86192" } }
{"authors":"Tara Estlin::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Selina Chu::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Rebecca Castano::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Gail Woodward::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Michelle Gierach::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Andrew Thompson::California Institute of Technology--Steven Schaffer::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"OS11A-2008: Online Detection of Mixed Layer Depth for Autonomous Underwater Vehicles", "abstract":"The accurate determination of the mixed layer depth (MLD) plays a crucial role in studying ocean dynamics and climate change. Various methods to estimate MLD have been proposed [1, 2]. However there is no current consensus on the best model, which leads to large uncertainty in the estimation. The variability, coupled with the complexity of physical, chemical and biological processes involved and the uncertainty and instabilities of the upper ocean surface, makes estimating MLD a challenging task. MLD varies significantly, even across a small spatial area (< 10km), and this depth is fluctuating, even over a short period of time (< 24 hrs), depending on the season. This abstract describes our proposed online algorithm for detecting mixed layer depth that would operate onboard an autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV). Using an online method permits a more adaptive approach to estimating MLD. Our proposed algorithm is based on an ensemble approach, which includes data mining techniques for real-time peak and change detection, learned seasonal variability profile, combined with MLD estimation criteria in [1]. In this study, we analyze measurements using glider data collected from the OSMOSIS (Ocean Surface Mixing, Ocean Submesoscale Interaction Study) project, concatenated into a year-long time series [3]. The glider data consists of nine full-depth moorings, which were deployed in a 15 km by 15 km box at the Porcupine Abyssal Plain in the northeast Atlantic, centered at 16.2°W, 48.7°N. Our algorithm utilizes direct measurements of salinity, temperature, depth and time and the design is based on the spatial and temporal variability of MLD learned. We will present our initial work on tracking the MLD based on real-time simulations using the OSMOSIS glider data and discussed for the case of deploying on a single AUV. Using an online algorithm for estimating MLD in-situ enables the system to rapidly adapt to the variability in a real-world environment and also allows for the intelligent operation of the limited sampling resources available on an AUV. We will discuss the autonomy architecture and algorithm design for implementing this methodology and present results from our initial investigation. [1] de Boyer Montégut, et al, 2004 [2] Holte and Talley, 2009 [3] https://www2.physics.ox.ac.uk/collaborations/osmosis", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86192", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86193" } }
{"authors":"Eli Dueker::Bard College--Gregory O'Mullan::Queens College, CUNY--Angel Montero::Queens College, CUNY--", "title":"A23F-0399: Biology of the Coarse Aerosol Mode: Insights Into Urban Aerosol Ecology", "abstract":"Microbial aerosols have been understudied, despite implications for climate studies, public health, and biogeochemical cycling. Because viable bacterial aerosols are often associated with coarse aerosol particles, our limited understanding of the coarse aerosol mode further impedes our ability to develop models of viable bacterial aerosol production, transport, and fate in the outdoor environment, particularly in crowded urban centers. To address this knowledge gap, we studied aerosol particle biology and size distributions in a broad range of urban and rural settings. Our previously published findings suggest a link between microbial viability and local production of coarse aerosols from waterways, waste treatment facilities, and terrestrial systems in urban and rural environments. Both in coastal Maine and in New York Harbor, coarse aerosols and viable bacterial aerosols increased with increasing wind speeds above 4 m s-1, a dynamic that was observed over time scales ranging from minutes to hours. At a New York City superfund-designated waterway regularly contaminated with raw sewage, aeration remediation efforts resulted in significant increases of coarse aerosols and bacterial aerosols above that waterway. Our current research indicates that bacterial communities in aerosols at this superfund site have a greater similarity to bacterial communities in the contaminated waterway with wind speeds above 4 m s-1. Size-fractionated sampling of viable microbial aerosols along the urban waterfront has also revealed significant shifts in bacterial aerosols, and specifically bacteria associated with coarse aerosols, when wind direction changes from onshore to offshore. This research highlights the key connections between bacterial aerosol viability and the coarse aerosol fraction, which is important in assessments of production, transport, and fate of bacterial contamination in the urban environment.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86193", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86195" } }
{"authors":"Molly Phipps::Self Employed--", "title":"ED23B-0863: Using Local Stories as a Call to Action on Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation in Minnesota", "abstract":"Climate Generation: A Will Steger Legacy and the University of Minnesota’s Regional Sustainability Development Partnerships (RSDP) have developed a novel approach to engaging rural Minnesotans on climate change issues. Through the use of personal, local stories about individuals’ paths to action to mitigate and or adapt to climate change, Climate Generation and RSDP aim to spur others to action. Minnesota’s Changing Climate project includes 12 Climate Convenings throughout rural Minnesota in a range of communities (tourism-based, agrarian, natural resources-based, university towns) to engage local populations in highly local conversations about climate change, its local impacts, and local solutions currently occurring. Climate Generation and RSDP have partnered with Molly Phipps Consulting to evaluate the efficacy of this approach in rural Minnesota. Data include pre and post convening surveys examining participants’ current action around climate change, attitudes toward climate change (using questions from Maibach, Roser-Renouf, and Leiserowitz, 2009), and the strength of their social network to support their current and ongoing work toward mitigating and adapting to climate change. Although the Climate Convenings are tailored to each community, all include a resource fair of local organizations already engaging in climate change mitigation and adaptation activities which participants can participate in, a welcome from a trusted local official, a presentation on the science of climate change, sharing of local climate stories, and break-out groups where participants can learn how to get involved in a particular mitigation or adaptation strategy. Preliminary results have been positive: participants feel motivated to work toward mitigating and adapting to climate change, and more local stories have emerged that can be shared in follow-up webinars and on a project website to continue to inspire others to act.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86195", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86196" } }
{"authors":"Xuyi Zhao::Center for Earth System Science, Tsinghua University--Jun Cai::Center for Earth System Science, Tsinghua University--Duole Feng::Center for Earth System Science, Tsinghua University--Yuqi Bai::Center for Earth System Science, Tsinghua University--Bing Xu::Center for Earth System Science, Tsinghua University--", "title":"NH51A-1855: Meteorological Influence on the 2009 Influenza A (H1N1) Pandemic in Mainland China.", "abstract":"Since May 2009, a novel influenza A (H1N1) pandemic has spread rapidly in mainland China from Mexico. Although there has been substantial analysis of this influenza, reliable work estimating its spatial dynamics and determinants remain scarce. The survival and transmission of this pandemic virus not only depends on its biological properties, but also a correlation with external environmental factors. In this study, we collected daily influenza A (H1N1) cases and corresponding annual meteorological factors in mainland China from May 2009 to April 2010. By analyzing these data at county-level, a similarity index, which considered the spatio-temporal characteristics of the disease, was proposed to evaluate the role and lag time of meteorological factors in the influenza transmission. The results indicated that the influenza spanned a large geographical area, following an overall trend from east to west across the country. The spatio-temporal transmission of the disease was affected by a series of meteorological variables, especially absolute humidity with a 3-week lag. These findings confirmed that the absolute humidity and other meteorological variables contributed to the local occurrence and dispersal of influenza A (H1N1). The impact of meteorological variables and their lag effects could be involved in the improvement of effective strategies to control and prevent disease outbreaks.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86196", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86197" } }
{"authors":"Amanda Martens::University of Alberta--Uldis Silins::University of Alberta--Kevin Bladon::University of Alberta--Chris Williams::University of Alberta--Michael Wagner::University of Alberta--Evan Luchkow::University of Alberta--", "title":"H31D-1440: Stable isotope analysis of energy dynamics in aquatic ecosystems suggests trophic shifts following severe wildfire", "abstract":"Wildfire alters landscapes and can have significant impacts on stream ecosystems. The 2003 Lost Creek wildfire was one of the most severe on Alberta’s eastern rocky mountain slopes, resulting in elevated sediment production and nutrient (phosphorus, nitrogen, and carbon) export in impacted streams. These resulted in increased algal productivity and macroinvertebrate abundance and diversity, and as a result, fish in watersheds draining wildfire affected catchments were larger than those in the same age class from reference (unburned) watersheds. In the present investigation, stable isotope analysis of C and N was utilized to evaluate ecosystem energy dynamics and describe trophic relationships in those watersheds. Aquatic invertebrates from burned catchments showed enrichment in δ13C and δ15N relative to algae suggesting a reliance on algae (autochthony) as a primary source of energy. Invertebrates from unburned systems were depleted in δ13C relative to algae indicating reliance on allochthonous or terrestrial primary energy sources. Preliminary analysis of δ15N in macroinvertebrates showed slight enrichment in burned catchments suggesting a trophic shift. More comprehensive macroinvertebrate sampling and identification has been conducted; isotopic analysis will provide greater resolution of how specific families within feeding guilds have been affected by wildfire. This will provide more robust insights into how wildfires may impact stream ecology in mountain environments.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86197", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86199" } }
{"authors":"Danielle Cox::NOAA Beaufort University of Miami--Carolyn Currin::NOAA NCCOS Center for Coastal Fisheries and Habitat Research--Nathan Mctigue::National Ocean Service--", "title":"B21H-0572: Blue carbon for how long? Lability of buried salt marsh carbon released via erosion.", "abstract":"With our climate rapidly changing due to increasing greenhouse gas emissions, the ability of coastal wetlands to sequester carbon (C) on century to millennial time scales has bolstered new interest in these habitats. This stored sedimentary organic carbon termed “blue C” can be eroded to surface horizons from the impacts of sea level rise, storm events, or other physical modifications of the coastline, potentially returning CO2 to the atmosphere upon microbially mediated remineralization. The rates and extent of these remineralization processes are largely unknown. A field exercise revealed a horizontal gradient in the organic matter content of marsh sediments perpendicular to creek banks, as proximity to tidal creeks resulted in a decline in sediment C content, with some variation due to creekbank morphology. We also conducted lab experiments to test the effect of temperature, as in some systems it has been found that a 1°C increase in temperature increases organic matter decomposition rates by 20%. In this study, fluxes of dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC), pH, and pCO2 were measured to determine carbon remineralization rates of marsh sediment collected 30 cm below the surface. A 20°C and 30°C temperature treatment was instituted to examine Q10 and activation energy of the decomposition processes that could potentially act as a climate change positive feedback upon erosion of blue carbon. Laboratory results show that the century-old blue carbon overall is refractory to tidal creek microbes, as only a maximum of 0.28% of sediment organic C was respired in two-week incubations. However, the remineralization rate exhibited a Q10 of 2.45, indicating that the organic carbon, despite being refractory, is temperature sensitive and will degrade exponentially if exposed to higher temperatures. These rates were then modeled at current and projected temperature profiles and applied to actual erosion rates in the study site to assess the release of carbon dioxide via erosion under different climate change scenarios.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86199", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86200" } }
{"authors":"Thomas Ferrara::GHD Services Inc.--Amy Townsend-Small::University of Cincinnati Main Campus--David Lyon::Environmental Defense Fund Boulder--Brian Lamb::Washington State University--Anastasia Fries::University of Cincinnati Main Campus--", "title":"A43F-0362: Characterizing Methane Emissions and Sources from Abandoned Oil and Gas Wells in the United States", "abstract":"Recent work indicates that methane (CH4) inventories for the United States are underestimated. We made direct measurements of CH4 emissions from 144 abandoned oil and gas wells, a source currently missing from inventories. Most abandoned wells do not emit CH4, but about 2% of wells surveyed contributed 95% of the observed emissions, particularly unplugged wells. Isotopic analyses indicate that wells emit CH4 from natural gas and/or coal bed CH4. Using emission factors developed from these measurements we provide basin wide estimates of CH4 emissions from abandoned wells in the Uintah and Denver-Julesburg basins. Extrapolated nationally, leakage from abandoned wells may contribute significantly to the current CH4 inventory for oil and gas activities. Additional data on emissions and activity factors are needed to accurately determine the contribution of abandoned wells to CH4 budgets, particularly a better characterization of the distribution of high emitters.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86200", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86201" } }
{"authors":"Kathleen Quigley::Wake Forest University--", "title":"B21D-0509: Assessing the Impacts of Herbivory on Plant Silica Accumulation across a Global Network of Grasslands", "abstract":"Plants, especially grasses, have a profound impact on the biogeochemical cycling of silicon. Silicic acid (Si(OH)4) in soil water is absorbed by plant roots, transported via the transpiration stream, and deposited as solid silica (SiO2) phytoliths in leaf tissue. Evidence indicates that plant phytolith accumulation may have evolved as an anti-herbivore strategy, and modern studies reveal that these silica particles are abrasive to animal mouthparts and can interfere with digestion. Furthermore, several studies have shown that grasses have the ability to respond to insect and mammal herbivory by modifying the amount of silicon they absorb from soil, a property known as inducible defense. However, herbivory studies remain largely limited to a laboratory setting, and research in natural systems has only been conducted at a regional spatial scale. To address whether these localized patterns persist at the global scale, we utilized data from a network of 40 grassland sites occurring on six continents. Vegetation samples including grasses, forbs, and litter, were collected in and out of 6m x 6m herbivore exclosures by a team of collaborating scientists for an on-going research effort known as the Nutrient Network (NutNet). We utilized near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) to create a calibration for plant silica which allowed for the rapid analysis of more than 1000 samples. Preliminary analyses indicate that silica content of grasses was higher outside of exclosures, where herbivores had access to vegetation. Our data reveal that herbivores play a significant role in modifying plant silicon uptake, and hence, the rates of silicon cycling in grasslands across the globe.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86201", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86202" } }
{"authors":"David Meyer::USGS--", "title":"IN41D-02: Using GIBS and Worldview to Connect Global Processes to Local Events", "abstract":"The NASA Worldview client and undelrying Global Image Browse Service (GIBS) are powerful tools for visualizing dynamic global processes in a clear and understandable manner. Currently viewable data layers, such as sea surface temperature, cloud and aersol parameters, snow cover and sea ice, and fires can be observed over time to gain a better understanding of the interrleationship between land, ocean and atmospheric processes, and how these relationships evolve over time. This presentation demonstrates the use of these tools to visualize (for example) relationships between fire and air quality over North America, the evolution of the recent El Nino, and changes in sea ice extent, using Worldview directly, and GIBS through both open source and commercial applications. The presentation also discusses visualizations that will be possible with anticipated new data layers.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86202", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86203" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"EP53B-1013: The Role of Source Material in Basin Sedimentation, as Illustrated within Eureka Valley, Death Valley National Park, CA.", "abstract":"Steep landscapes are known to provide sediment to sink regions, but often petrological factors can dominate basin sedimentation. Within Eureka Valley, in northwestern Death Valley National Park, normal faulting has exposed a steep cliff face on the western margin of the Last Chance range with four kilometers of vertical relief from the valley floor and an angle of repose of nearly 38 degrees. The cliff face is composed of Cambrian limestone and dolomite, including the Bonanza King, Carrara and Wood Canyon formations. Interacting with local normal faulting, these units preferentially break off the cliff face in coherent blocks, which result in landslide deposits rather than as finer grained material found within the basin. The valley is well known for a large sand dune, which derives its sediment from distal sources to the north, instead of from the adjacent Last Chance Range cliff face. During the Holocene, sediment is sourced primary from the northerly Willow Wash and Cucomungo canyon, a relatively small drainage (less than 80 km2) within the Sylvan Mountains. Within this drainage, the Jurassic quartz monzonite of Beer Creek is heavily fractured due to motion of the Fish Valley Lake – Death Valley fault zone. Thus, the quartz monzonite is more easily eroded than the well-consolidated limestone and dolomite that forms the Last Change Range cliff face. As well, the resultant eroded material is smaller grained, and thus more easily transported than the limestone. Consequently, this work highlights an excellent example of the strong influence that source material can have on basin sedimentation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86203", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86204" } }
{"authors":"Shannon Brown::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"A51L-0238: Observations of Convective Development from Repeat Pass Radiometry during CalWaters 2015: Outlook for the TEMPEST Mission", "abstract":"The Temporal Experiment for Storms and Tropical Systems (TEMPEST), which was recently selected as a NASA Earth Ventures technology demonstration mission, uses a constellation of five CubeSats flying in formation to provide observations of developing precipitation with a temporal resolution of 5 minutes. The observations are made using small mm-wave radiometers with frequencies ranging from 90 to 183 GHz which are sensitive to the integrated ice water path above the precipitation layer in the storm. This paper describes TEMPEST like observations that were made with the High Altitude MMIC Sounding Radiometer (HAMSR) on the ER-2 during CalWaters 2015. HAMSR is a mm-wave airborne radiometer with 25 channels in three bands; 50, 118 and 183 GHz. During the campaign, a small isolated area of convection was identified by the ER-2 pilot and 5 overpasses of the area were made with about 5 minutes between each pass. The HAMSR data reveal two convective cells, one which was diminishing and one which was developing. The mm-wave channels near the 183 GHz water vapor line clearly show the change in the vertical extent of the storm with time, a proxy for vertical velocity. These data demonstrate the potential for TEMPEST like observations from an orbital vantage point. This paper will provide an overview of the measurements, an analysis of the observations and offer perspectives for the TEMPEST mission.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86204", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86205" } }
{"authors":"Samuel Moore::University of Texas at Austin--Aditya Kar::Fort Valley State University--Rosalia Gomez::Texas Advanced Computing Center--", "title":"ED23D-0874: An Integrative and Collaborative Approach to Creating a Diverse and Computationally Competent Geoscience Workforce", "abstract":"A partnership between Fort Valley State University (FVSU), the Jackson School of Geosciences at The University of Texas (UT) at Austin, and the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) is engaging computational geoscience faculty and researchers with academically talented underrepresented minority (URM) students, training them to solve grand challenges . These next generation computational geoscientists are being trained to solve some of the world’s most challenging geoscience grand challenges requiring data intensive large scale modeling and simulation on high performance computers . UT Austin’s geoscience outreach program GeoFORCE, recently awarded the Presidential Award in Excellence in Science, Mathematics and Engineering Mentoring, contributes to the collaborative best practices in engaging researchers with URM students. Collaborative efforts over the past decade are providing data demonstrating that integrative pipeline programs with mentoring and paid internship opportunities, multi-year scholarships, computational training, and communication skills development are having an impact on URMs developing middle skills for geoscience careers. Since 1997, the Cooperative Developmental Energy Program at FVSU and its collaborating universities have graduated 87 engineers, 33 geoscientists, and eight health physicists. Recruited as early as high school, students enroll for three years at FVSU majoring in mathematics, chemistry or biology, and then transfer to UT Austin or other partner institutions to complete a second STEM degree, including geosciences. A partnership with the Integrative Computational Education and Research Traineeship (ICERT), a National Science Foundation (NSF) Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at TACC provides students with a 10-week summer research experience at UT Austin. Mentored by TACC researchers, students with no previous background in computational science learn to use some of the world’s most powerful high performance computing resources to address a grand geosciences problem. Students increase their ability to understand and explain the societal impact of their research and communicate the research to multidisciplinary and lay audiences via near-peer mentoring, poster presentations, and publication opportunities.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86205", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86206" } }
{"authors":"Hye-On Yoon::KBSI Korea Basic Science Institute--Joo-Ae Kim::KBSI Korea Basic Science Institute--Eunhye Kwon::Catholic University of Korea--Hosub Lee::KBSI Korea Basic Science Institute--Seulki Jung::KBSI Korea Basic Science Institute--Youn-Tae Kim::Yonsei University--", "title":"H43F-1591: Stable condition of dimethylmonothioarsinic acid (DMMTAV) and dimethyldithioarsinic acid ( DMDTAV) in landfill leachate", "abstract":"When waste containing arsenic (As) are disposed of landfill, such facilities (i.e., landfill) can play an important role in disseminating As to the surrounding environment. These disposal of waste containing As might cause a serious environmental pollution due to potentially As remobilization in landfill. Especially, As species containing sulfur such as DMDTAv and DMMTAv found occasionally high concentration in landfill leachate. These As species (i.e., DMDTAv and DMMTAv) had the higher toxicity to human cells compared to other pentavalent As species. However, there was no chemical standard material of these As species (i.e., DMDTAv and DMMTAv) commercially. In this study, we synthesized DMDTAv and DMMTAv by simulating reaction with the sufficient sulfur condition from DMAv. DMMTAv was quite changeable to DMDTAv due to its short life time from our preliminary study. Thus, it is important to find the stable condition of synthesis process for DMDTAv and DMMTAv under suitable environmental condition. This study can be very significant in quantitative analysis area to detect the various As species in environmental media such as landfill.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86206", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86207" } }
{"authors":"Xuan Shi::University of Arkansas--", "title":"IN51A-1798: Geocomputation over Hybrid Computer Architecture and Systems: Prior Works and On-going Initiatives at UARK", "abstract":"As NSF indicated – “Theory and experimentation have for centuries been regarded as two fundamental pillars of science. It is now widely recognized that computational and data-enabled science forms a critical third pillar.” Geocomputation is the third pillar of GIScience and geosciences. With the exponential growth of geodata, the challenge of scalable and high performance computing for big data analytics become urgent because many research activities are constrained by the inability of software or tool that even could not complete the computation process. Heterogeneous geodata integration and analytics obviously magnify the complexity and operational time frame. Many large-scale geospatial problems may be not processable at all if the computer system does not have sufficient memory or computational power. Emerging computer architectures, such as Intel’s Many Integrated Core (MIC) Architecture and Graphics Processing Unit (GPU), and advanced computing technologies provide promising solutions to employ massive parallelism and hardware resources to achieve scalability and high performance for data intensive computing over large spatiotemporal and social media data. Exploring novel algorithms and deploying the solutions in massively parallel computing environment to achieve the capability for scalable data processing and analytics over large-scale, complex, and heterogeneous geodata with consistent quality and high-performance has been the central theme of our research team in the Department of Geosciences at the University of Arkansas (UARK). New multi-core architectures combined with application accelerators hold the promise to achieve scalability and high performance by exploiting task and data levels of parallelism that are not supported by the conventional computing systems. Such a parallel or distributed computing environment is particularly suitable for large-scale geocomputation over big data as proved by our prior works, while the potential of such advanced infrastructure remains unexplored in this domain. Within this presentation, our prior and on-going initiatives will be summarized to exemplify how we exploit multicore CPUs, GPUs, and MICs, and clusters of CPUs, GPUs and MICs, to accelerate geocomputation in different applications.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86207", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86208" } }
{"authors":"Caitlin Tems::University of Southern California--", "title":"PP53C-2366: Tracking fluctuations in the intensity of the eastern tropical north Pacific oxygen minimum zone using a multi-proxy approach", "abstract":"Naturally occurring oxygen minimum zones (OMZs) are permanent midwater features that are associated with highly productive regions of the ocean, key microbial mediated biogeochemical cycling, and the deposition of organic rich sediments. The intensity of OMZs varies on glacial to interglacial time scales, indicating a relationship between the climate system and the expanse of OMZs, however, high-resolution studies tracking the fluctuations of OMZs on a near annual basis are lacking. In the Gulf of California (Pescadero Slope), the eastern tropical north Pacific OMZ impinges on basin slopes depositing laminated, hemipelagic sediments that record useful proxies of OMZ fluctuations. In an OMZ, low O2 content promotes water column denitrification, imparting an elevated 15N/14N isotopic signature on the residual nitrate in the water column. The elevated 15NO3- is upwelled and incorporated into particulate organic mater (POM) during primary production. The exported POM δ15Nsed then reflects the intensity of the regional OMZ at the time it was deposited. The Pescadero Slope record shows distinct temporal fluctuations in the δ15Nsed with decadal to multi-decadal and centennial cyclicity over the past 1200 years. The record reveals that the OMZ contracts during warmer climatic periods, including the Medieval Climate Optimum and the Industrial Revolution, and expands during cooler climates, specifically the Little Ice Age. The local mechanisms that are influencing fluctuations in the OMZ are investigated through an analysis of productivity proxies, including weight percent organic carbon and weight percent biogenic silica, and indicate OMZ expansion during periods of high productivity. Local productivity is driven by the intensity in the easterly trade winds in the Pacific, and thus the relationship between regional trade wind intensity and fluctuations in the intensity of the OMZ over the past 160 years will be discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86208", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86211" } }
{"authors":"Matthew Huber::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Jonathan Buzan::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Muge Komurcu::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Srinath Krishnan::Yale University--Emma McCabe::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--", "title":"GC34B-03: Simulations of Future Heat stress in the Northeast in a Convection Resolving Model", "abstract":"Heat stress is a chiefly a byproduct of temperature and humidity extremes and can be phrased in terms of wetbulb or dewpoint temperature. Consequently, it is a buoyancy related atmospheric variable which could alternatively be expressed as something like subcloud layer entropy or convective available potential energy (CAPE). Expressed in this latter way, predicting heat stress extreme events is equivalent to understanding the distribution of events in which convection is inhibited. Our goal in this study is to use a convection resolving model (the Weather Research and Forecasting Model at 3km grid spacing) to predict heat stress in future climate scenarios. The primary benefit relative to simply using a global climate model output is the removal of the ad hoc treatment of convective inhibition imposed by parameterization of convection in course resolution simulations. We focus on heat stress metrics relevant for humans and livestock within the Northeast of the U.S. and demonstrate the difference in projected heat stress engendered by explicitly resolving convection.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86211", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86212" } }
{"authors":"Christina Widiwijayanti::Nanyang Technological University--Fidel Costa::Nanyang Technological University--Nang Thin Zar Win::Nanyang Technological University--Karine Tan::Nanyang Technological University--Christopher Newhall::Mirisbiris Garden and Nature Center--Antonius Ratdomopurbo::Geological Agency of Indonesia--", "title":"V31B-3011: WOVOdat, A Worldwide Volcano Unrest Database, to Improve Eruption Forecasts", "abstract":"WOVOdat is the World Organization of Volcano Observatories’ Database of Volcanic Unrest. An international effort to develop common standards for compiling and storing data on volcanic unrests in a centralized database and freely web-accessible for reference during volcanic crises, comparative studies, and basic research on pre-eruption processes. WOVOdat will be to volcanology as an epidemiological database is to medicine. Despite the large spectrum of monitoring techniques, the interpretation of monitoring data throughout the evolution of the unrest and making timely forecasts remain the most challenging tasks for volcanologists. The field of eruption forecasting is becoming more quantitative, based on the understanding of the pre-eruptive magmatic processes and dynamic interaction between variables that are at play in a volcanic system. Such forecasts must also acknowledge and express the uncertainties, therefore most of current research in this field focused on the application of event tree analysis to reflect multiple possible scenarios and the probability of each scenario. Such forecasts are critically dependent on comprehensive and authoritative global volcano unrest data sets – the very information currently collected in WOVOdat. As the database becomes more complete, Boolean searches, side-by-side digital and thus scalable comparisons of unrest, pattern recognition, will generate reliable results. Statistical distribution obtained from WOVOdat can be then used to estimate the probabilities of each scenario after specific patterns of unrest. We established main web interface for data submission and visualizations, and have now incorporated ~20% of worldwide unrest data into the database, covering more than 100 eruptive episodes. In the upcoming years we will concentrate in acquiring data from volcano observatories develop a robust data query interface, optimizing data mining, and creating tools by which WOVOdat can be used for probabilistic eruption forecasting. The more data in WOVOdat, the more useful it will be.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86212", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86213" } }
{"authors":"Jess Pelaez::Blueprint Earth--Carlos Pelaez::Blueprint Earth--", "title":"ED21E-05: Breaking Down the Door: A Nonprofit Model Creating Pathways for Non-Traditional STEM Student Engagement", "abstract":"Blueprint Earth was created as a nonprofit scientific research organization dedicated to conducting micro-scale interdisciplinary environmental investigations to generate macroscopic, system-level environmental understanding. The field data collection and analysis process was conceived to be dependent on student participation and collaboration with more senior scientists, effecting knowledge transfer and emphasizing the critical nature of interdisciplinary research in investigating complex, macroscopic questions. Recruiting for student volunteer researchers is conducted in academic institutions, and to date has focused primarily on the Los Angeles area. Self-selecting student participation has run contrary to traditional STEM demographics. The vast majority of research participants in Blueprint Earth’s work are female and/or from a minority (non-white) background, and most are first-generation college students or from low-income, Pell grant-eligible households. Traditional field research programs for students often come at a high cost, creating barriers to access for field-based STEM opportunities. The nonprofit model employed by Blueprint Earth provides zero-cost access to opportunity for students that the STEM world is currently targeting for future professional development.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86213", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86214" } }
{"authors":"Mark Robbins::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Carli Arendt::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Anna Clinger::University of Michigan--Emily Stevenson::University of Michigan--Sarah Aciego::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--", "title":"C11A-0747: Tracing Shifts in Subglacial Hydrochemistry Due to Changes in Drainage Configuration: Athabasca Glacier, Alberta, Canada", "abstract":"Differences in the hydrological and chemical composition of glacial outflow are controlled by seasonality, subglacial bedrock mineralogy, physical/chemical weathering processes, and water-rock interaction time. While the chemical progression from onset of melt to peak melt has been well studied at various glaciers, few studies exist that examine the hydrological and associated chemical changes as the subglacial drainage network evolves from peak flow back to winter basal flow conditions. Here we use traditional hydrological and chemical techniques to examine the changes in subglacial drainage network configuration with the onset of winter at the Athabasca Glacier, Alberta, Canada. This glacier is one of eight alpine glaciers draining the Columbia Icefield in the Canadian Rockies. The Athabasca Glacier is situated atop Middle Cambrian limestone and carbonate shale generating predominately a carbonate weathering regime, but exhibits some evidence of silicate weathering. Analysis of major and trace element ratios, stable oxygen (δ18O) and hydrogen (δD) isotopic systems, and in-field chemical measurements (pH, electrical conductivity, total alkalinity), combined with discharge over a three-month period provides high-resolution insight into the change of subglacial hydrochemistry in this system. O-H isotopes over the course of the study show seasonal excursions, possibly indicating a change in meltwater source. Preliminary data reveal three possible shifts in subglacial dynamics suggesting shifts between carbonate and silicate weathering as expressed by relative cation contributions. These shifts may be reflective of different subglacial drainage configurations: higher silicate weathering rates, revealed by increased potassium concentrations in the end of season, could be generated by a shift to a more distributed drainage network and a longer water-rock interaction time. Our results clearly indicate changes in elemental concentrations correlated with decreases in glacial discharge with the onset of winter. Future analysis of the O-H isotopic system and possible shifts in types of chemical weathering may provide further insight into the expected shift from a summertime connected drainage to a wintertime disconnected network.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86214", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86216" } }
{"authors":"Hanqin Tian::Auburn University at Montgomery--Chaoqun Lu::Iowa State University--Philippe Ciais::CNRS--Anna Michalak::Carnegie Institution for Science Washington--Josep Canadell::CSIRO Ocean and Atmosphere Flagship Canberra--Eri Saikawa::Emory University--Deborah Huntzinger::Northern Arizona University--Kevin Gurney::Arizona State University--Stephen Sitch::University of Exeter--Bowen Zhang::Auburn University--Jia Yang::Auburn University--Philippe Bousquet::LSCE Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et de l'Environnement--Lori Bruhwiler::NOAA Boulder--Guangsheng Chen::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--Edward Dlugokencky::NOAA Boulder--Pierre Friedlingstein::University of Exeter--Jerry Melillo::MBL--Shufen Pan::Auburn University--Benjamin Poulter::Montana State University--Ronald Prinn::MIT--Marielle Saunois::LSCE Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et de l'Environnement--Christopher Schwalm::Northern Arizona University--Steven Wofsy::Harvard University--", "title":"B21M-03: The full budget of greenhouse gases in the terrestrial biosphere: From global C project to global GHG project", "abstract":"Terrestrial uptake of carbon dioxide (CO2) partially mitigates global climate change induced by anthropogenic greenhouse (GHG) emissions. However, warming from increasing biogenic emissions of methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) resulting from human activities may negate the cooling effect of CO2 uptake by the terrestrial biosphere. Terrestrial fluxes of individual GHGs have been studied intensively, but the net balance of the three major GHGs (CO2, CH4 and N2O) remains uncertain. Here we use bottom-up (BU: e.g., inventory, statistical extrapolation of local flux measurements, process-based modeling) and top-down (TD: atmospheric inversions) approaches to quantify net terrestrial biogenic fluxes of CO2, CH4 and N2O from natural ecosystems, croplands, and other biogenic sectors. After subtracting modeled estimates of pre-industrial fluxes from contemporary biogenic fluxes, we find the biogenic CH4 and N2O emissions resulting from human activities are opposite in sign but 1.6 times in magnitude equivalent to the global land uptake of CO2 in the 2000s based on global warming potential on 100-year time horizon. Among the emissions of CH4 and N2O, those from agriculture are the most important human perturbation, offsetting 1.2 to 1.4 times the global land CO2 sink. Our results suggest that the role of the terrestrial biosphere in exacerbating climate change could be alleviated if net human-induced biogenic GHG emissions were reduced through the implementation of land-based mitigation strategies, with the largest mitigation potential being in Southern Asia, a region that includes both China and India. This study highlights the importance of simultaneously considering three major GHGs in global and regional climate assessments, mitigation options and climate policy decisions, given the likely countervailing impacts of mitigation efforts, such as enhanced N2O emissions with soil C sequestration, paddy-drying to reduce CH4 emissions, and indirect emissions from biofuels.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86216", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86217" } }
{"authors":"Robert Michell::University of Maryland College Park--Marilia Samara::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--", "title":"SM23C-2568: Using the Occurrence and Statistics of NEIALs Observed with PFISR as a Means to Remote Sense Magnetosphere-Ionosphere Coupling Processes", "abstract":"Common-volume observations of Poker Flat Incoherent Scatter Radar (PFISR) data and high-resolution auroral imaging will be presented. The focus is on the Naturally Enhanced Ion Acoustic Lines (NEIALs) that are observed in the radar data. The current solar maximum, covering the previous several years has produced a significant increase in the auroral activity that has been observed over Poker Flat, AK. As a result of this increased auroral activity, there has been a large increase in the number of NEIALs observed in the radar data. Occurrence statistics of NEIALs, and their characteristics, including the ratio of up-shifted to down-shifted power will be presented along with precipitating electron energy estimates derived from simultaneous multi-spectral auroral imaging data. These analyses will be evaluated as a means to elucidate the magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling processes responsible for the NEIALs.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86217", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86218" } }
{"authors":"Masaki Akaogi::Gakushuin University--Takayuki Ishii::Bayerisches Geoinstitut, Universitaet Bayreuth--Hiroshi Kojitani::Gakushuin University--", "title":"DI11C-2605: Precise Comparison of Phase Relations in Pyrolite, MORB and Harzburgite Up To 28 GPa 1600-2200°C Using Multi-sample Cell Technique", "abstract":"It is accepted that 410- and 660-km seismic discontinuities are attributed to phase transitions in pyrolite. MORB, harzburgite and pyrolite constitute a subducting slab, and pyrolite is also major hot plume material. Mantle tomography studies demonstrated that slabs are subducting down to the lower mantle and that some hot plumes are elevating from the deep lower mantle to the upper mantle. Therefore, phase relations of these mantle rocks provide important information to elucidate dynamics of heterogeneous components in the deep mantle. We performed high-pressure high-temperature quench experiments at 12-28 GPa and 1600-2200°C for 2-10 hours using a Kawai-type multianvil apparatus at Gakushuin University. Starting materials were prepared from the oxide mixtures of pyrolite, MORB and harzburgite compositions. The three samples were packed with pressure calibrants (MgSiO3 enstatite or pyrope) in a Re multi-sample capsule with four holes, and kept at the same P, T conditions to precisely compare the phase relations. Phases of the recovered samples were identified with a microfocus X ray diffractometer and a SEM-EDS. Using the measured compositions, phase proportions were calculated with mass-balance calculation, and densities of the rocks were obtained using thermoelastic data. The density profiles of three rock compositions show that MORB and harzburgite in slabs can subduct to the 660-km discontinuity because the post-spinel transition in pyrolite occurs at lower pressure than that in harzburgite and the post-garnet transition in MORB. Besides, in hot plumes, pyrolite has lower density than average pyrolitic mantle by not only its higher temperature but also different mineral assemblages from the average mantle due to decomposition of ringwoodite to garnet + ferropericlase at the depth around 660-km discontinuity.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86218", "section":"Earth's Deep Interior"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86219" } }
{"authors":"Fang Zhao::University of Maryland College Park--Ning Zeng::University of Maryland College Park--", "title":"B21E-0511: Differing mechanisms in the CO2 seasonal cycle and its amplitude change", "abstract":"The net terrestrial carbon flux to the atmosphere simulated by nine TRENDY models during 1961-2012 are examined on its mean seasonal cycle and seasonal amplitude increase. While the model ensemble agree well with observations on both the trend and latitudinal pattern of flux seasonal amplitude, notable model spread is evident. Further analyses using results from TRENDY’s sensitivity experiments highlight important underlying difference in mechanisms responsible for the similar amplitude increase simulated by the models. We found that CO2 fertilization effect is the prevailing mechanism for amplitude increase of net carbon flux in seven out of nine models. Models disagree on the effect of climate: even though high latitude warming contribute to a major part of amplitude increase over the boreal region in two thirds of the models, this positive impact is largely negated by the negative influence over the temperate region and the tropics, possibly related to droughts that lowered the productivity of ecosystem during peak growing season. The effect of land use plays a significant positive role in five out of the nine models, however few model is able to simulate mechanisms such as improved farming practice and crop selection. Our results suggest that using model ensemble only may hide important mechanisms from individual model.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86219", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86220" } }
{"authors":"Martin Wosnik::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Peter Bachant::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--", "title":"GC52C-04: Cross-flow turbines: physical and numerical model studies towards improved array simulations", "abstract":"Cross-flow, or vertical-axis turbines, show potential in marine hydrokinetic (MHK) and wind energy applications. As turbine designs mature, the research focus is shifting from individual devices towards improving turbine array layouts for maximizing overall power output, i.e., minimizing wake interference for axial-flow turbines, or taking advantage of constructive wake interaction for cross-flow turbines. Numerical simulations are generally better suited to explore the turbine array design parameter space, as physical model studies of large arrays at large model scale would be expensive. However, since the computing power available today is not sufficient to conduct simulations of the flow in and around large arrays of turbines with fully resolved turbine geometries, the turbines’ interaction with the energy resource needs to be parameterized, or modeled. Most models in use today, e.g. actuator disk, are not able to predict the unique wake structure generated by cross-flow turbines. Experiments were carried out using a high-resolution turbine test bed in a large cross-section tow tank, designed to achieve sufficiently high Reynolds numbers for the results to be Reynolds number independent with respect to turbine performance and wake statistics, such that they can be reliably extrapolated to full scale and used for model validation. To improve parameterization in array simulations, an actuator line model (ALM) was developed to provide a computationally feasible method for simulating full turbine arrays inside Navier--Stokes models. The ALM predicts turbine loading with the blade element method combined with sub-models for dynamic stall and flow curvature. The open-source software is written as an extension library for the OpenFOAM CFD package, which allows the ALM body force to be applied to their standard RANS and LES solvers. Turbine forcing is also applied to volume of fluid (VOF) models, e.g., for predicting free surface effects on submerged MHK devices. An additional sub-model is considered for injecting turbulence model scalar quantities based on actuator line element loading. Results are presented for the simulation of performance and wake dynamics of axial- and cross-flow turbines and compared with experiments and body-fitted mesh, blade-resolving CFD. Supported by NSF-CBET grant 1150797.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86220", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86221" } }
{"authors":"Thomas Lorenson::USGS Western Regional Offices Menlo Park--Peter Swarzenski::USGS--Katherine Maier::Organization Not Listed--Roberto Gwiazda::Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute--Charles Paull::Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute--Esther Sumner::University of Southampton--William Symons::University of Southampton--", "title":"EP41B-0929: Sediment Dating With Short-Lived Radioisotopes In Monterey Canyon, California Imply Episodes Of Rapid Deposition And Erosion", "abstract":"Submarine canyons are a major conduit for terrestrial material to the deep sea. To better constrain the timing and rates in which sediment is transported down-canyon, we collected a series of sediment cores along the axis of Monterey Canyon, and quantified mass accumulation rates using short-lived radio-isotopes. A suite of sediment cores were carefully collected perpendicular to the canyon thalweg in water depths of approximately 300m, 500m, 800m, and 1500m using a remotely operated vehicle (ROV). We choose cores that were between 60m and 75m above the canyon thalweg on canyon side bench features for correlation with moored instrument deployments. The sediment cores reveal a complex stratigraphy that includes copious bioturbation features, sand lenses, subtle erosional surfaces, subtle graded bedding, and abrupt changes sediment texture and color. Downcore excess 210Pb and 137Cs profiles imply episodic deposition and remobilization cycles on the canyon benches. Excess 210Pb activities in cores reach depths of up to 1m, implying very rapid sedimentation. Sedimentation rates vary with water depth, generally with the highest sedimentation rate in closest to land, but vary substantially on adjacent canyon benches. Preliminary results demonstrate that sediment movement within Monterey Canyon is both dynamic and episodic on human time-scales and can be reconstructed used short-lived radio-isotopes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86221", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86222" } }
{"authors":"Kyle Landolt::University of Tennessee--Robert Washington-Allen::University of Tennessee--Nicholas Nagle::University of Tennessee--Henri Grissino-Mayer::University of Tennessee--", "title":"GC13F-1220: Towards the Development of Historical Indicators of Spatial Carbon Dynamics in Drylands: A Blue Oak Woodlands of California Case Study", "abstract":"The role of drylands in global terrestrial carbon dynamics is understudied and thus is not well understood. Yet, drylands cover 41% of the terrestrial land surface and their net primary productivity (NPP) can influence the amount of atmospheric carbon dioxide by sequestering carbon through photosynthesis. The blue oak woodlands of California represent a large component of the region’s terrestrial vegetation for which 300-year tree ring width (TRW) chronologies have been developed. Consequently, the goal of this study is to reconstruct the historical spatial and temporal variation in NPP using the observed correlation of TRW with a remotely sensed proxy for NPP: the time-integrated normalized difference vegetation index (iNDVI). Thus, this study’s objectives are to 1) determine the best grain resolution of 8 km pixel resolution Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer iNDVI to achieve the highest correlation with blue oak TRW, 2) use this correlation to develop iNDVI chronologies at each site, and 4) generate 300 years of NPP spatial maps by interpolating the iNDVI chronologies with soil and topographic factors using cokriging regression. We hypothesize that (1) neither the TWR or their residual chronologies will impart a large difference in correlation to iNDVI, and (2) that the best correlations of TRW with iNDVI will be at coarser grain resolutions. We found that linear regression of TRW to mean NDVI from 1982 to 2003 at selected chronology sites had significant adjusted R2-values of 0.1823 to 0.2572. We expect these relationships will strengthen in comparison to iNDVI and adjustment of grain resolution. Additionally, we will compare the contemporary record of the historical NPP from 2001 to 2003 to both historical Palmer Drought Severity Index and net ecosystem exchange (NEE) maps.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86222", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86223" } }
{"authors":"Steven Goodbred::Vanderbilt-Earth & Envir Scies--Jennifer Pickering::Vanderbilt University--Carol Wilson::Louisiana State University--Ryan Sincavage::Vanderbilt University--Michael Steckler::Columbia University of New York--Syed Akhter::University of Dhaka--Grimaud Jean-Louis::Univ Minnesota--Saddam Hossain::University of Dhaka--Steven Kuehl::College William & Mary--Dhiman Mondal::CUNY Queens College--Luisa Palamenghi::University of Bremen--Chris Paola::Univ Minnesota--Tilmann Schwenk::University of Bremen--Volkhard Spiess::University of Bremen--Mohammad Ullah::University of Hoston--", "title":"EP32B-06: Embracing Non-Stationarity – Hysteresis and Coherence in the Ganges-Brahmaputra Source-to-Sink System and Its Imprint on the Stratigraphic Record.", "abstract":"The transport and deposition of Himalayan sediment since the last lowstand has led to 10,000 km3 of fluvio-deltaic sands and muds infilling the tectonically active Bengal basin. The considerable dimensions of this late Quaternary sequence provide an expanded geologic record of source-to-sink processes from glacial to interglacial boundary conditions. Recent coring, seismic surveys, and lab analyses of basin sediments now provide an unprecedented view of mass transport history, depositional controls, and resulting stratigraphic architecture. During the glacial period, river hydrology was strongly affected by ephemeral ice-dammed lakes and associated sediment sequestration in bedrock valleys of the upper catchment; downstream, though, reduced sediment flux and stochastic discharge led to scour and incision of the lower alluvial valleys. Specifically, in the Bengal basin these glacial-period influences led to development of a vast, exhumed valley system floored by a prominent basal gravel and boulder layer. The legacy of such sediment starvation and valley growth presented an apparent mass-balance problem and a potential hysteresis in the evolutionary path of the delta system as it developed during ensuing post-glacial sea-level rise. However, the hysteresis effect is ultimately mitigated by coherence between post-glacial sea-level rise and the abrupt onset and peak intensity of the summer monsoon. In this case, the mass-balance problem is offset by intensified summer monsoon rains and enhanced discharge of exhumed bedrock-valley and lake-bed sediments, leading to infilling of the downstream margin valley in pace with sea-level rise. As a result, any hysteresis effect in the Ganges-Brahmaputra system had been erased by the mid-Holocene deceleration of sea level. In the stratigraphic record, the imprint of these prominent shifts in the source-to-sink system is best reflected in the sand grain size and sand-mud ratios of preserved sediment, and by mass-balance derived estimates of total sediment flux. Although such major shifts in this sedimentary system are recorded by relatively subtle stratigraphic indicators, fidelity in these interpretations is greatly enhanced by consulting multiple proxy records on the controlling variables between source and sink.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86223", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86224" } }
{"authors":"Christopher Mouikis::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Sam Bingham::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Lynn Kistler::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Harlan Spence::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Matina Gkioulidou::Applied Physics Laboratory Johns Hopkins--Seth Claudepierre::Aerospace Corporation Santa Monica--Charles Farrugia::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--", "title":"SM41E-2545: The plasmasheet H+ and O+ contribution on the storm time ring current", "abstract":"The source population of the storm time ring current is the night side plasma sheet. We use Van Allen Probes and Cluster observations to determine the contribution of the convecting plasma sheet H+ and O+ particles in the storm time development of the ring current. Using the Volland-Stern model with a dipole magnetic field together with the identification of the observed energy cutoffs in the particle spectra, we specify the pressure contributed by H+ and O+ populations that are on open drift paths vs. the pressure contributed by the trapped populations, for different local times. We find that during the storm main phase most of the ring current pressure in the pre-midnight inner magnetosphere is contributed by particles on open drift paths that cause the development of a strong partial ring current that causes most of the main phase Dst drop. These particles can reach as deep as L~2 and their pressure compares to the local magnetic field pressure as deep as L~3. During the recovery phase, if these particles are not lost at the magnetopause, will become trapped and will contribute to the symmetric ring current.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86224", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86225" } }
{"authors":"Ryan Wyatt::California Academy of Sciences--", "title":"ED54A-05: Immersive STEM: From Fulldome to VR Technologies", "abstract":"For more than 15 years, fulldome video technology has transformed planetariums worldwide, using data-driven visualizations to support science storytelling. Fulldome video shares significant technical infrastructure with emerging VR headset technologies, and these personalized VR experiences allow for new audiences and new experiences of an existing library of context—as well as affording new opportunities for fulldome producers to explore. At the California Academy of Sciences, we are translating assets for our planetarium shows into immersive experiences for a variety of HR headsets. We have adapted scenes from our four award-wining features—Fragile Planet (2008), Life: A Cosmic Story (2010), Earthquake: Evidence of a Restless Planet (2012), and Habitat Earth (2015)—to place viewers inside a virtual planetarium viewing the shows. Similarly, we have released two creative-commons mini-shows on various VR outlets. This presentation will also highlight content the Academy will make available from our upcoming 2016 planetarium show about asteroids, comets, and solar system origins, some of which has been formatted for a full four-pi-steradian perspective. The shared immersive environment of digital planetariums offers significant opportunities for education and affective engagement of STEM-hungry audiences—including students, families, and adults. With the advent of VR technologies, we can leverage the experience of fulldome producers and planetarium professionals to create personalized home experiences that allow new ways to experience their content.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86225", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86227" } }
{"authors":"David Groves::RAND Corporation Santa Monica--Nidhi Kalra::RAND Corporation Santa Monica--Laura Bonzanigo::The World Bank--Edmundo Molina-Perez::RAND Corporation Santa Monica--", "title":"PA11B-2157: Developing a Robust Strategy for Implementing a Water Resources Master Plan in Lima, Peru", "abstract":"Lima, the capital of Peru, faces significant water stress. It is the fifth largest metropolitan area in Latin America, and the second largest desert city in the world. The city has developed a Master Plan of major investment projects to improve water reliability until 2040. Yet key questions remain. Is the Master Plan sufficient for ensuring reliability in the face of deeply uncertain future climate change and demand? How do uncertain budget and project feasibility conditions shape Lima’s options? How should the investments in the plan be prioritized, and can some be delayed? Lima is not alone in facing these planning challenges. Governments invest billions of dollars annually in long-term projects. Yet deep uncertainties pose formidable challenges to making near-term decisions that make long-term sense. The World Bank has spearheaded a community of practice on methods for Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty (DMU). This pilot project in Peru is the first in-depth application of DMU techniques to water supply planning in a developing country. It builds on prior analysis done in New York, California, and for the Colorado River, yet shows how these methods can be applied in regions which do not have as advanced data or tools available. The project combines three methods in particular -- Robust Decision Making, Decision Scaling, and Adaptive Pathways -- to help Lima implement its Master Plan in a way that is robust, no-regret, and adaptive. It was done in close partnership with SEDAPAL, the water utility company in Lima, and in coordination with other national WRM and meteorological agencies. This talk will: Present the planning challenges Lima and other cities face, including climate change Describe DMU methodologies and how they were applied in collaboration with SEDAPAL Summarize recommendations for achieving long-term water reliability in Lima Suggest how these methodologies can benefit other investment projects in developing countries.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86227", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86229" } }
{"authors":"Landon Terry::Utah State University--Rees Fullmer::--Charles Swenson::Utah State University--Alan Marchant::Utah State University--Preston Hooser::Utah State University--Jesse Victors::Utah State University--Kyle Muchmore::Utah State University--Li Yin::Utah State University--", "title":"ED11A-0845: Implementation of a High-Altitude Balloon Payload to Study Thermospheric Wind Speeds through Redline Airglow Emissions of Atomic Oxygen at 630 nm via a Split-field Etalon Doppler Imager Utilizing a Fabry-Perot Interferometer.", "abstract":"Little data exists on the wind velocity characteristics of the upper atmosphere. The Red Line Air Glow Experiment is designed to measure the relative density and velocity of the thermosphere at altitudes approximately ranging between 250 and 350 km. To accomplish this, a Split-Field Etalon Imager will make doppler shift interferometry measurements of the oxygen redline at 630 nm wavelength airglow a using a high altitude balloon platform floating at 36 km. The imager collects up to 10 images per hour. Velocity resolution is within a 5 m/s. The Etalon is thermally controlled to within 1 deg C to achieve this goal. The pointing direction of the sensor is determined post-filght using GPS, IMU and three sun imaging sensors. An experimental star camera is included with a potential pointing accuracy of under 5 arc-min. The instrument first flew from Fort Sumner N,M., on August 26, 2014. Due to the short duration (3.5 hours) of the data collection period on this flight, a second flight was requested and awarded, to take place around September 10, 2015. This flight will allow for data collection over a 24 hour period. Both flight results will be included in the final presentation. This project was designed and built by an undergraduate team including students from physics, aerospace, electrical and mechanical engineering and management at both Utah State University and the University of Maryland Eastern Shores as a NASA’s Undergraduate Student Instrument Project (USIP).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86229", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86230" } }
{"authors":"Jorge Bajo::SUNY Buffalo--Bettina Martinez-Hackert::SUNY Buffalo State--Cecilia Polio::Direccion General del Observatorio Ambiental--Eduardo Gutierrez::Direccion General del Observatorio Ambiental--", "title":"PA41D-05: Incorporating Community Knowledge to Lahar Hazard Maps: Canton Buenos Aires Case Study, at Santa Ana (Ilamatepec) Volcano", "abstract":"Santa Ana (Ilamatepec) Volcano is an active composite volcano located in the Apaneca Volcanic Field located in western part of El Salvador, Central America. The volcano is surrounded by rural communities in its proximal areas and the second (Santa Ana, 13 km) and fourth (Sonsosante, 15 km) largest cities of the country. On October 1st, 2005, the volcano erupted after months of increased activity. Following the eruption, volcanic mitigation projects were conducted in the region, but the communities had little or no input on them. This project consisted in the creation of lahar volcanic hazard map for the Canton Buanos Aires on the northern part of the volcano by incorporating the community's knowledge from prior events to model parameters and results. The work with the community consisted in several meetings where the community members recounted past events. They were asked to map the outcomes of those events using either a topographic map of the area, a Google Earth image, or a blank paper poster size. These maps have been used to identify hazard and vulnerable areas, and for model validation. These maps were presented to the communities and they accepted their results and the maps.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86230", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86231" } }
{"authors":"Mingquan Mu::University of California Irvine--Forrest Hoffman::University of California Irvine--David Lawrence::National Center for Atmospheric Research--William Riley::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Gretchen Keppel-Aleks::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Charles Koven::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Erik Kluzek::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Jiafu Mao::Oak Ridge National Laboratory--James Randerson::University of California Irvine--", "title":"B21E-0513: Design and Application of a Community Land Benchmarking System for Earth System Models", "abstract":"Benchmarking has been widely used to assess the ability of climate models to capture the spatial and temporal variability of observations during the historical era. For the carbon cycle and terrestrial ecosystems, the design and development of an open-source community platform has been an important goal as part of the International Land Model Benchmarking (ILAMB) project. Here we developed a new benchmarking software system that enables the user to specify the models, benchmarks, and scoring metrics, so that results can be tailored to specific model intercomparison projects. Evaluation data sets included soil and aboveground carbon stocks, fluxes of energy, carbon and water, burned area, leaf area, and climate forcing and response variables. We used this system to evaluate simulations from the 5th Phase of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5) with prognostic atmospheric carbon dioxide levels over the period from 1850 to 2005 (i.e., esmHistorical simulations archived on the Earth System Grid Federation). We found that the multi-model ensemble had a high bias in incoming solar radiation across Asia, likely as a consequence of incomplete representation of aerosol effects in this region, and in South America, primarily as a consequence of a low bias in mean annual precipitation. The reduced precipitation in South America had a larger influence on gross primary production than the high bias in incoming light, and as a consequence gross primary production had a low bias relative to the observations. Although model to model variations were large, the multi-model mean had a positive bias in atmospheric carbon dioxide that has been attributed in past work to weak ocean uptake of fossil emissions. In mid latitudes of the northern hemisphere, most models overestimate latent heat fluxes in the early part of the growing season, and underestimate these fluxes in mid-summer and early fall, whereas sensible heat fluxes show the opposite trend.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86231", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86232" } }
{"authors":"John Fulton::USGS Colorado Water Science Center Denver--David Bjerklie::USGS Connecticut Water Science Center--John Jones::USGS--J. Minear::USGS Office of Research--", "title":"H43M-03: Computing Real-time Streamflow Using Emerging Technologies: Non-contact Radars and the Probability Concept", "abstract":"Measuring streamflow, developing, and maintaining rating curves at new streamgaging stations is both time-consuming and problematic. Hydro 21 was an initiative by the U.S. Geological Survey to provide vision and leadership to identify and evaluate new technologies and methods that had the potential to change the way in which streamgaging is conducted. Since 2014, additional trials have been conducted to evaluate some of the methods promoted by the Hydro 21 Committee. Emerging technologies such as continuous-wave radars and computationally-efficient methods such as the Probability Concept require significantly less field time, promote real-time velocity and streamflow measurements, and apply to unsteady flow conditions such as looped ratings and unsteady-flood flows. Portable and fixed-mount radars have advanced beyond the development phase, are cost effective, and readily available in the marketplace. The Probability Concept is based on an alternative velocity-distribution equation developed by C.-L. Chiu, who pioneered the concept. By measuring the surface-water velocity and correcting for environmental influences such as wind drift, radars offer a reliable alternative for measuring and computing real-time streamflow for a variety of hydraulic conditions. If successful, these tools may allow us to establish ratings more efficiently, assess unsteady flow conditions, and report real-time streamflow at new streamgaging stations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86232", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86233" } }
{"authors":"Eugene Yan::Argonne National Laboratory--Vincent Tidwell::Sandia Natl Laboratories--Matthew Bizjack::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Vicky Espinoza::Argonne National Laboratory--Alissa Jared::Argonne National Laboratory--", "title":"GC31E-1245: Modeling the vulnerability of hydroelectricity generation under drought scenarios", "abstract":"Hydroelectricity generation highly relies on in-stream and reservoir water availability. The western US has recently experienced increasingly sever, frequent, and prolonged droughts resulting in significant water availability issues. A large number of hydropower plants in Western Electricity Coordinating Council (WECC) are located in California River Basin and Pacific Northwest River Basin. In supporting the WECC’s long-term transmission planning, a drought impact analysis was performed with a series of data and modeling tools. This presentation will demonstrate a case study for California River Basin, which has recently experienced one of the worst droughts in its history.  The purpose of this study is to evaluate potential risk for hydroelectricity generation due to projected drought scenarios in the medium-term (through the year of 2030). On the basis of historical droughts and the projected drought year for 2020-2030, three drought scenarios were identified. The hydrologic model was constructed and calibrated to simulate evapotranspiration, streamflow, soil moisture, irrigation as well as reservoir storage and discharge based on various dam operation rules and targets under three drought scenarios. The model also incorporates the projected future water demand in 2030 (e.g. municipal, agricultural, electricity generation). The projected monthly reservoir discharges were used to predict the monthly hydropower generation for hydropower plants with a capacity greater than 50 MW in California River Basin for each drought scenario. The results from this study identify spatial distribution of vulnerable hydropower plants and watersheds as well as the level of potential reduction of electricity generation under various drought scenarios and provide valuable insights into future mitigation strategies and long-term planning.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86233", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86234" } }
{"authors":"Suzanne Pierce::University of Texas at Austin--John Gentle::Texas Advanced Computing Center--", "title":"IN44A-07: MCSDSS: A Multi-Criteria Decision Support System for Merging Geoscience Information with Natural User Interfaces, Preference Ranking, and Interactive Data Utilities", "abstract":"The multi-criteria decision support system (MCSDSS) is a newly completed application for touch-enabled group decision support that uses D3 data visualization tools, a geojson conversion utility that we developed, and Paralelex to create an interactive tool. The MCSDSS is a prototype system intended to demonstrate the potential capabilities of a single page application (SPA) running atop a web and cloud based architecture utilizing open source technologies. The application is implemented on current web standards while supporting human interface design that targets both traditional mouse/keyboard interactions and modern touch/gesture enabled interactions. The technology stack for MCSDSS was selected with the goal of creating a robust and dynamic modular codebase that can be adjusted to fit many use cases and scale to support usage loads that range between simple data display to complex scientific simulation-based modelling and analytics. The application integrates current frameworks for highly performant agile development with unit testing, statistical analysis, data visualization, mapping technologies, geographic data manipulation, and cloud infrastructure while retaining support for traditional HTML5/CSS3 web standards. The software lifecylcle for MCSDSS has following best practices to develop, share, and document the codebase and application. Code is documented and shared via an online repository with the option for programmers to see, contribute, or fork the codebase. Example data files and tutorial documentation have been shared with clear descriptions and data object identifiers. And the metadata about the application has been incorporated into an OntoSoft entry to ensure that MCSDSS is searchable and clearly described.   MCSDSS is a flexible platform that allows for data fusion and inclusion of large datasets in an interactive front-end application capable of connecting with other science-based applications and advanced computing resources. In addition, MCSDSS offers functionality that enables communication with non-technical users for policy, education, or engagement with groups around scientific topics with societal relevance.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86234", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86235" } }
{"authors":"Eduardo Bendek::NASA Ames Research Center--Ruslan Belikov::NASA Ames Research Center--Jared Males::University of Arizona--Sandrine Thomas::NASA Ames Research Center--Julien Lozi::NAOJ National Astronomical Observatory of Japan--", "title":"P33B-2134: A Space Mission Concept to Directly Image the Habitable Zone of Alpha Centauri", "abstract":"The inner edge of Alpha Cen A&B Habitable Zone is found at exceptionally large angular separations of 0.7” and 0.4” respectively. This enables direct imaging of the system with a 30cm class telescope. Contrast ratios in the order of 1010 are needed to image Earth-brightness planets. Low-resolution (5-band) spectra of all planets, will allow establishing the presence and amount of an atmosphere. This star system configuration is optimal for a specialized small, and stable space telescope, that can achieve high-contrast but has limited resolution. This paper describes an innovative instrument design and a mission concept based on a full Silicon Carbide off-axis telescope, which has a Phase Induce Amplitude Apodization coronagraph embedded in the telescope. This architecture maximizes stability and throughput. The Multi-Star Wave Front algorithm is implemented to drive a deformable mirror controlling simultaneously diffracted light from the on-axis and binary companion star. The instrument has a Focal Plane Occulter to reject starlight into a Low Order Wavefront Sensor that delivers high-precision pointing control. Finally we utilize the ODI post-processing method that takes advantage of a highly stable environment (Earth-trailing orbit) and a continuous sequence of images spanning 2 years, to reduce the final noise floor in post processing to ~2e-11 levels, enabling high confidence and at least 90% completeness detections of Earth-like planets.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86235", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86236" } }
{"authors":"Neal Auchter::Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University--Zane Jobe::Shell Houston--Nick Howes::Shell--", "title":"EP13A-0933: Temporal Evolution of Submarine Channel Trajectory and Mobility: Quantitative Analysis and Comparison to Rivers", "abstract":"Submarine channels are the primary conduits for the transport of clastic detritus from the continents into the deep sea. During their evolution, these channels migrate, forming channel belts that record a complex history of vertical degradation, lateral migration, and vertical aggradation. Previous work drawing on seismic, outcrop, and modeled examples of submarine channel systems have qualitatively observed a significant component of vertical aggradation and a temporal trend transitioning from a phase dominated by lateral migration to one dominated by vertical aggradation. The processes that drive these changes in channel trajectory and their stratigraphic consequences remain poorly constrained. Furthermore, comparisons/contrasts between submarine channels and rivers often do not take into account the variability in channel trajectory/mobility, which clearly affects the resultant architecture. This study compiles a global dataset of >320 channel trajectory and geometry measurements derived from a global suite 2-D cross sections including 21 submarine channel systems and 13 fluvial systems. These data enable the quantitative treatment of the temporal evolution of channel trajectory/mobility as well as highlighting key differences between submarine channels and rivers. Submarine channels show a strong trend of decreasing channel mobility during their evolution, resulting in early stage lateral migration and late stage aggradation. Fluvial channels show a similar evolution, but with ~5x less aggradation and ~2x larger mobility values. Fluvial channel belts contain a large proportion of lateral accretion and have similar trajectories as early phase or degradational submarine channels, while late stage or aggradation submarine channel belts contain significantly more vertically stacked channel fill deposits. These submarine trajectory/mobility measurements provide a valuable quantitative basis for explaining the evolution of stratigraphic architecture of submarine channel systems and how it differs from channelized fluvial architecture. These data also help to constrain submarine channel evolution in a broader and more system-wide context.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86236", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86237" } }
{"authors":"Toshiki Oma::Nagoya University--Takeo Ito::Nagoya University--Ryohei Sasajima::Nagoya University--", "title":"T21E-2872: A Simulation of crustal deformation around sourthwest Japan using 3D Finite Element Method", "abstract":"In southwest Japan, the Philippine Sea plate is subducting beneath the Amurian plate at the Nankai Trough. Megathrust earthquakes have been occurred with recurrence intervals of about 100-150 years. Previous studies have estimated co-seismic slip distribution at the 1944 Tokankai and the 1946 Nankai earthquakes and interplate plate coupling along the Nankai Trough. Many of previous studies employed a homogeneous elastic half space or elastic and viscoelastic layers structure. However, these assumptions as mentioned above are inadequate, since inhomogeneous structure is exceled in the real earth result from subducting plate. Therefore, in order to estimate the effect of inhomogeneous structure on the crustal deformation, we calculate crustal deformation due to Megathrust earthquake using 3-dimensional Finite Element Method (FEM). We use FEM software PyLith v2.1. In this study, we construct a finite element mesh with the region of 3000km(SW) × 2300km(NS) × 400km(depth) cover Japanese Islands, using Cubit 13.0. This mesh is considered topography, the Philippine Sea plate, the Pacific plate, Moho discontinuity, and curvature of the earth.  In order to examine differences of surface displacement between inhomogeneous and homogeneous structures, we use co-seismic slip distribution of the 1944 and 1946 earthquakes estimated by Sagiya and Thatcher (1999). In result, surface elastic response under inhomogeneous structure becomes 30% larger than it’s homogeneous structure at the Muroto cape. This difference indicates that co-seismic slip or plate coupling distribution estimated from Green’s function under an assumption of homogeneous structure is overestimated. Then, we calculate viscoelastic response assuming Maxwell rheology model and viscosity as 1×1019. As a result, predicted horizontal velocity of viscoelastic response due to the events corresponds to 10 % of observed present deformation. It suggest that spatial pattern of plate coupling might be change when we consider viscoelastic response due to previous earthquakes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86237", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86238" } }
{"authors":"Vadim Uritsky::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Joseph Davila::NASA Goddard SFC--Shaela Jones::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--", "title":"SH31C-2444: Constraining Large-Scale Solar Magnetic Field Models with Optical Coronal Observations", "abstract":"Scientific success of the Solar Probe Plus (SPP) and Solar Orbiter (SO) missions will depend to a large extent on the accuracy of the available coronal magnetic field models describing the connectivity of plasma disturbances in the inner heliosphere with their source regions. We argue that ground based and satellite coronagraph images can provide robust geometric constraints for the next generation of improved coronal magnetic field extrapolation models. In contrast to the previously proposed loop segmentation codes designed for detecting compact closed-field structures above solar active regions, we focus on the large-scale geometry of the open-field coronal regions located at significant radial distances from the solar surface. Details on the new feature detection algorithms will be presented. By applying the developed image processing methodology to high-resolution Mauna Loa Solar Observatory images, we perform an optimized 3D B-line tracing for a full Carrington rotation using the magnetic field extrapolation code presented in a companion talk by S.Jones at al. Tracing results are shown to be in a good qualitative agreement with the large-scalie configuration of the optical corona. Subsequent phases of the project and the related data products for SSP and SO missions as wwll as the supporting global heliospheric simulations will be discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86238", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86239" } }
{"authors":"Timothy Bartholomaus::University of Texas--Ryan Walker::University of Maryland--Leigh Stearns::University of Kansas--Mark Fahnestock::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Ryan Cassotto::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Ginny Catania::University of Texas at Austin--Denis Felikson::University of Texas at Austin--Mason Fried::University of Texas, Institute for Geophysics--Dave Sutherland::University of Oregon--Jonathan Nash::Oregon State Univ--Emily Shroyer::Oregon State Univ--", "title":"C43B-0805: High-resolution, terrestrial radar velocity observations and model results reveal a strong bed at stable, tidewater Rink Isbræ, West Greenland", "abstract":"At tidewater Rink Isbræ, on the central west coast of Greenland, satellite observations reveal that glacier velocities and terminus positions have remained stable, while the lowest 25 km have thinned 30 m since 1985. Over this same time period, other tidewater glaciers in central west Greenland have retreated, thinned and accelerated. Here we present field observations and model results to show that the flow of Rink Isbræ is resisted by unusually high basal shear stresses. Terrestrial radar interferometry (TRI) observations over 9 days in summer 2014 demonstrate weak velocity response to 4 km wide, full thickness calving events. Velocities at the terminus change by +/- 10% in response to rising and falling tides within a partial-width, 2.5-km-long floating ice tongue; however these tidal perturbations damp out within 2 km of the grounding line. Inversions for basal shear stress and force balance analyses together show that basal shear stresses in excess of 300 kPa support the majority of the driving stress at thick, steep Rink Isbræ. These observational and modeling results tell a consistent story in which a strong bed may limit the unstable tidewater glacier retreats observed elsewhere. Rink Isbræ has an erosion resistant quartzite bed with low fracture density. We hypothesize that this geology may play a major role in the bed strength.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86239", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86240" } }
{"authors":"Rachael Hoover::Blueprint Earth--Michael Harrison::Blueprint Earth California State University Los Angeles--Nate Sonnenthal::Blueprint Earth--Alexander Hernandez::Blueprint Earth--Jess Pelaez::Blueprint Earth--", "title":"IN33B-1807: Herding Cats: Geocuration Practices Employed for Field Research Data Collection Activities and Visualization by Blueprint Earth", "abstract":"Researchers investigating interdisciplinary topics must work to understand the barriers created by information siloes in order to productively collaborate on complex Earth science questions. These barriers create acute challenges when research is driven by observations rather than hypotheses, as communication between collaborators hinges on data synthesis techniques that often vary greatly between disciplines. Field data collection across disciplines creates even more challenges, and employing student researchers of varying abilities demands an approach that is structured, and yet still flexible enough to accommodate inherent differences in the subjective portions of student data collection. Blueprint Earth is performing system-level environmental observations in the broad areas of geology, biology, hydrology, and atmospheric science. Traditional field data collection methodologies are employed for ease of reproducibility, but must translate across disciplinary information siloes. Information collected must be readily useable in the formulation of hypotheses based on field observations, which necessitates an understanding of key metrics by all investigators involved in data analysis. Blueprint Earth demonstrates the ability to create clear data standards across several disciplines while incorporating a quality control process and this allows for conversion of data into functional visualizations. Additionally, geocuration is organized such that data will be ready for public dissemination upon completion of field research.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86240", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86241" } }
{"authors":"Yasuko Okada::Kyoto University--Tetsuya Takemi::Disaster Prevention Research Institute, Kyoto University--Hirohiko Ishikawa::Kyoto University--", "title":"A13A-0303: Future changes in atmospheric condition for the baiu under RCP scenarios", "abstract":"This study focuses on atmospheric circulation fields during the baiu in Japan with global warming projection experimental data conducted using a 20-km mesh global atmospheric model (MRI-AGCM3.2) under Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP) scenarios. This model also used 4 different sea surface temperature (SST) initial conditions. Support of this dataset is provided by the Meteorological Research Institute (MRI). The baiu front indicated by the north-south gradient of moist static energy moves northward in present-day climate, whereas this northward shift in future climate simulations is very slow during May and June. In future late baiu season, the baiu front stays in the northern part of Japan even in August. As a result, the rich water vapor is transported around western Japan and the daily precipitation amount will increase in August. This northward shift of baiu front is associated with the westward expansion of the enhanced the North Pacific subtropical high (NPSH) into Japan region. However, the convective activity around northwest Pacific Ocean is inactive and is unlikely to occur convective jump (CJ). These models show that the weak trough exists in upper troposphere around Japan. Therefore, the cold advection stays in the northern part of Japan during June. In July, the front due to the strengthening of the NPSH moves northward, and then it stays until August. This feature is often found between the clustered SSTs, Cluster 2 and 3. The mean field of future August also show the inflow of rich water vapor content to Japan islands. In this model, the extreme rainfall suggested tends to almost increase over the Japan islands during future summer. This work was conducted under the Program for Risk Information on Climate Change supported by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology-Japan (MEXT).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86241", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86242" } }
{"authors":"Matthew Bartos::Arizona State University--Mikhail Chester::Arizona State University--Daniel Eisenberg::Arizona State University--Brandon Gorman::Arizona State University--Nathan Johnson::Arizona State University--", "title":"GC33C-1311: Impacts of Climate Change on Electric Transmission Capacity and Peak Electricity Load in the United States", "abstract":"Climate change may hinder future electricity reliability by reducing electric transmission capacity while simultaneously increasing electricity demand. This study estimates potential climate impacts to electric transmission capacity and peak electricity load in the United States. Electric power cables suffer decreased transmission capacity as they get hotter; similarly, during the summer peak period, electricity demand typically increases with hotter ambient air temperatures due to increased cooling loads. As atmospheric carbon concentrations increase, higher air temperatures may strain power infrastructure by reducing transmission capacity and increasing peak electricity loads. Taken together, these coincident impacts may have unpredictable consequences for electric power reliability. We estimate the effects of climate change on both the rated capacity of transmission infrastructure and expected electricity demand for 120 electrical utilities across the United States. We estimate climate-attributable capacity reductions to transmission lines by constructing thermal models of representative conductors, then forcing these models with downscaled CMIP5 temperature projections to determine the relative change in rated ampacity over the twenty-first century. Next, we assess the impact of climate change on electricity demand by using historical relationships between ambient temperature and utility-scale summertime peak load to estimate the extent to which climate change will incur additional peak load increases. We use downscaled temperature projections from 11 CMIP5 GCM models under 3 atmospheric carbon scenarios. We find that by mid-century (2040-2060), climate change may reduce average summertime transmission capacity by 4-6% relative to the 1990-2010 reference period. At the same time, peak summertime loads may rise by roughly 2-12% on average due to increases in daily maximum air temperature. In the absence of energy efficiency gains, demand-side management programs and transmission infrastructure upgrades, these load increases have the potential to upset current assumptions about future electricity reliability. Failure to account for the effects of climate change on the electrical grid may leave power providers unprepared to meet future electricity needs.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86242", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86244" } }
{"authors":"Yasunori Miura::Yamaguchi University--", "title":"NH11A-1879: Paleozoic Akiyoshi broken limestone of iron and carbon-bearing quenched veins by impacts on water Earth", "abstract":"As active Earth has been described by the present site after accretionary moved formations through the surface. In fact, the present Japanese Islands have less young volcanic rocks compared with much sedimentary rocks (ca. 60 vol. % ) of the Paleozoic Akiyoshi limestone remained from ocean-floor aggregates and uplifted to form the brecciated plateau in the Miocene at present site of Sea of Japan. The main purpose of the paper is to elucidate the in-situ material evidence of brecciated limestone blocks. The Akiyoshi underground samples (up to 250m in depth from the Kaerimizu site) drilled by the Akiyoshi Science Museum show significant changes of physical properties of powdered calcite minerals along the fossil reversal distributions [1-4] with anomalous abundances of siderophiles of bulk XRF data analysis at the bottom of 243m in depth[3]. The present in-situ data of FE-ASEM and Raman data show that the deep samples have re- crystallized calcite-halite and rapid veins with iron-carbon grains with shocked nano-carbon [2-4]. To compare with overseas samples, four American Paleozoic samples are investigated in this study of Carlsbad limestone, Sierra Madera Permian limestone, Alamo breccias and Santa-Fe breccias, where the Santa-Fe sample contains shocked quartz and limestone with fluid-tube texture and separated nano-carbon grains in this study [4]. The Akiyoshi limestone formed near at Equator has been remained as shallow impact breccias stored in the interior with Chinese blocks to present site by continental drift process followed by recent impact to be uplifted at the formed site of the Japan islands [4], which might be typical characteristics of active water planet Earth.   Reference: [1] Miura Y. (1986): Bull. Akiyoshi-Dai Museum of Natural History (Yamaguchi), 22, 1-22. [3] Miura Y. (1996): Shock-wave Handbook (SV-Tokyo), p.1073-1209. [4] Miura Y. (2014, 2015): Japan G U-2014,2015 (English), each pp.1.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86244", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86245" } }
{"authors":"Ian Faloona::University of California Davis--Stephen Conley::University of California Davis--Shobhit Mehrotra::University of California Davis--Maxime Suard::University of California Davis--", "title":"A43F-0360: Application and Validation of a Novel Airborne Sampling Methodology That Uses Green's Theorem and Micrometeorological Principles to Estimate Surface Emission Rates", "abstract":"Airborne, so called top-down, estimates of greenhouse gas emissions are becoming much more prevalent with the advent of sensitive, high-rate trace gas instrumentation, and they have lead to some controversial findings when compared with bottom-up engineering estimates reported to environmental regulatory agencies. Consequently, a proper assessment of the accuracy of these airborne methods is crucial to interpreting the meaning of such discrepancies. We present a new method of sampling surface sources of methane and ethane, of spatial scales as small as about 100 m, where consecutive loops are flown around the source at many different flight altitudes. Using the principles of Reynolds decomposition for the wind and scalar concentrations, along with Green's Theorem, we show that the method accurately accounts for the smaller scale turbulent dispersion of the local plume, which is often ignored in other average ` mass balance`  methods. With the help of Large Eddy Simulations we further show how the sampling method can be optimized for the micrometeorological conditions encountered during any flight. Furthermore, by sampling controlled releases of methane and ethane on the ground we are able to ascertain an accuracy in the method of better than 15%, with limits of detection below 5 kg/hr for both gases. Because of the FAA mandated minimum flight safe altitude of 500 ft., placement of the plane is critical to not allowing a large portion of the plume to flow underneath the lowest sampling altitude, which is generally the leading source of uncertainty in these measurements. Finally, because the bulk of the flux is carried by rapid plume encounters, which are relatively rare, we show how the accuracy of the method is strongly dependent on the number of sampling loops, or time spent sampling the source.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86245", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86246" } }
{"authors":"Paul Janzen::University of Montana--", "title":"SH41B-2380: Temporal variation of the IBEX Ribbon", "abstract":"We present a study of the time variation over half a solar cycle of the ENA flux composing the IBEX Ribbon, with the goal of determining how closely the Ribbon's temporal variation matches that of the adjacent globally distributed ENA flux (GDF). A high degree of similarity implies that the Ribbon flux originates in the same heliospheric regions as the GDF, presumably the inner heliosheath. If the Ribbon flux shows a separate time history, then it likely originates elsewhere, possibly in the outer heliosheath or beyond. Determining the source region places strong constraints on Ribbon formation theories. Prior Ribbon studies have either treated the Ribbon and the GDF as static over the mission, or have not attempted to separate the GDF from the Ribbon when looking at time variation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86246", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86247" } }
{"authors":"Christopher Kincaid::Univ Rhode Island--Sara Szwaja::University of Rhode Island Narragansett Bay--Richard Sylvia::University of Rhode Island Narragansett Bay--Kelsey Druken::Australian National University--", "title":"DI22A-05: Modeling Diverse Pathways to Age Progressive Volcanism in Subduction Zones.", "abstract":"One of the best, and most challenging clues to unraveling mantle circulation patterns in subduction zones comes in the form of age progressive volcanic and geochemical trends. Hard fought geological data from many subduction zones, like Tonga-Lau, the Cascades and Costa-Rica/Nicaragua, reveal striking temporal patterns used in defining mantle flow directions and rates. We summarize results from laboratory subduction models showing a range in circulation and thermal-chemical transport processes. These interaction styles are capable of producing such trends, often reflecting apparent instead of actual mantle velocities. Lab experiments use a glucose working fluid to represent Earth's upper mantle and kinematically driven plates to produce a range in slab sinking and related wedge transport patterns. Kinematic forcing assumes most of the super-adiabatic temperature gradient available to drive major downwellings is in the tabular slabs. Moreover, sinking styles for fully dynamic subduction depend on many complicating factors that are only poorly understood and which can vary widely even for repeated parameter combinations. Kinematic models have the benefit of precise, repeatable control of slab motions and wedge flow responses. Results generated with these techniques show the evolution of near-surface thermal-chemical-rheological heterogeneities leads to age progressive surface expressions in a variety of ways. One set of experiments shows that rollback and back-arc extension combine to produce distinct modes of linear, age progressive melt delivery to the surface through a) erosion of the rheological boundary layer beneath the overriding plate, and deformation and redistribution of both b) mantle residuum produced from decompression melting and c) formerly active, buoyant plumes. Additional experiments consider buoyant diapirs rising in a wedge under the influence of rollback, back-arc spreading and slab-gaps. Strongly deflected diapirs, experiencing variable rise rates, also commonly surface as linear, age progressive tracks. Applying these results to systems like the Cascades and Tonga-Lau suggest there are multiple ways to produce timing trends due both to linear flows and waves of heterogeneity obliquely impacting surface plates.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86247", "section":"Earth's Deep Interior"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86248" } }
{"authors":"John D'Alessandro::San Jose State University--Minghui Diao::San Jose State University--Ming Chen::National Center for Atmospheric Research--", "title":"A51O-0301: Comparisons of Anvil Cirrus Spatial Characteristics between Airborne Observations in DC3 Campaign and WRF Simulations", "abstract":"John D’Alessandro1, Minghui Diao1, Ming Chen2, George Bryan2, Hugh Morrison2 1. Department of Meteorology and Climate Science, San Jose State University 2. Mesoscale & Microscale Meteorology Division, National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO, 80301 Ice crystal formation requires the prerequisite condition of ice supersaturation, i.e., relative humidity with respect to ice (RHi) greater than 100%. The formation and evolution of ice supersaturated regions (ISSRs) has large impact on the subsequent formation of ice clouds. To examine the characteristics of simulated ice supersaturated regions at various model spatial resolutions, case studies between airborne in-situ measurements in the NSF Deep Convective, Clouds and Chemistry (DC3) campaign (May – June 2012) and WRF simulations are conducted in this work. Recent studies using ~200 m in-situ observations showed that ice supersaturated regions are mostly around 1 km in horizontal scale (Diao et al. 2014). Yet it is still unclear if such observed characteristics can be represented by WRF simulations at various spatial resolutions. In this work, we compare the WRF simulated anvil cirrus spatial characteristics with those observed in the DC3 campaign over the southern great plains in US. The WRF model is run at 1 km and 3 km horizontal grid spacing with a recent update of Thompson microphysics scheme. Our comparisons focus on the spatial characteristics of ISSRs and cirrus clouds, including the distributions of their horizontal scales, the maximum relative humidity with respect to ice (RHi) and the relationship between RHi and temperature. Our previous work on the NCAR CM1 cloud-resolving model shows that the higher resolution runs (i.e., 250m and 1km) generally have better agreement with observations than the coarser resolution (4km) runs. We will examine if similar trend exists for WRF simulations in deep convection cases. In addition, we will compare the simulation results between WRF and CM1, particularly for spatial correlations between ISSRs and cirrus and their evolution (based on the method of Diao et al. 2013). Overall, our work will help to assess the representation of ISSRs and cirrus in WRF simulation based on comparisons with in-situ observations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86248", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86249" } }
{"authors":"Elena Sparrow::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Malinda Chase::Association for Interior Native Educators--Samuel Demientieff::River Journeys of Alaska--Jessica Brunacini::Columbia Climate Center--Stephanie Pfirman::Barnard College--", "title":"ED23C-0871: Integrating World Views, Knowledge and Venues in Climate Science Education", "abstract":"The Reaching Arctic Communities Facing Climate Change Project integrates traditional and western knowledge and observations in climate science to facilitate dialog and learning among Alaska Native adults about climate change and its impacts on the environment and on Alaskan communities. In one of the models we have tested, the informal education took place at a 4-day camp by the Tanana River in Fairbanks, Alaska. Participants included Alaska Native elders, leaders, educators and natural resource managers, community members and university scientists. Results of pre/post camp surveys showed increased awareness of scientific and technical language used in climate science, improved ability to locate resources, tools, and strategies for learning about climate change, enhanced capacity to communicate climate change in a relevant way to their audiences and communities, confirmed the value of elders in helping them understand, respond and adapt to climate change, and that the camp setting facilitated an in-depth discussion and sharing of knowledge. The camp also enhanced the awareness about weather, climate and the environment of the camp facilitators who also noticed a shift in their own thinking and behavior. After the camp one participant who is an educator shared some of the hands-on tools developed by Polar Learning and Responding Climate Change Education Partnership project and used at the camp, with her 6th grade students, with the other teachers in her school and also at a state conference. Another shared what she learned with her family and friends as well as at a conference sponsored by her faith community where she was an invited speaker. Another camp was scheduled for this past summer but was cancelled due to some unforeseen weather/climate related events. A camp is planned for early summer in 2016; however other models of reaching the adult Native populations in a similar culturally responsive manner as the camps will also be explored and tested.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86249", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86250" } }
{"authors":"Taylor Joyal::Northern Arizona University--Jan Boll::Washington State University--Alexander Fremier::Washington State University--", "title":"H43B-1501: Land use and climate change impacts on mountain watershed hydrology in data-poor humid tropics", "abstract":"The tropical low latitudes characterized by livelihood supporting multi-use landscapes are experiencing climate shifts more significant than elsewhere on the planet. In these regions, land use induced changes to soil matrix and macropore hydraulic conductivity affect the processes of percolation, lateral flow, and overland flow generation. This leads to altered watershed and stream hydrology. To distinguish the influences of climate and land use on stream hydrology, we used a distributed physical hydrology model to describe and predict watershed hydrology under variable land use and climate conditions. The GIS-based model can simulate the hydrological response to specified land use configurations in a watershed when limited precipitation and soil data are available. We simulated the rate that precipitation travels through three watersheds located in the central highlands of Costa Rica and explored how resilient this travel time is to different climate conditions and land use distributions. The model revealed abrupt changes in simulated stream hydrology resulting from land use conversion and increases in precipitation intensity. Our findings suggest that decreased soil storage capacity associated with deforestation leads to increased overland flow and peak flow magnitude, reducing the hydrologic resilience of watersheds to predicted increases in precipitation intensity associated with climate change. A sensitivity analysis of the model parameters showed that the impacts of land use more significantly alter watershed hydrology than climate parameters.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86250", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86251" } }
{"authors":"Sheila Seaman::University of Massachusetts Amherst--", "title":"V13B-3105: The Growth of Melt Inclusion- and Water-Rich Zones in Clinopyroxene Phenocrysts of the Powai Ankaramite Flow, Deccan Traps, India: Rapid Closed System Oscillatory Mineral Growth", "abstract":"Water concentrations were measured and mapped using FTIR spectroscopy in clinopyroxene phenocrysts of the Powai ankaramite flow, located near Mumbai, west of the Western Ghats escarpment of the Deccan province, India. Samples were provided by Dr. Hetu Sheth of the Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai. Chatterjee and Sheth (2015) showed that phenocrysts in the flow were part of a cumulate layer intruded by high-temperature basaltic melt at ~ 6 kb and ~1230oC. Cpx phenocrysts are euhedral and have concentric bands (100 to 200 microns thick) of fine (10-20 micron diameter) melt inclusions. Cpx bands that host melt inclusions have higher concentrations of water than inclusion-free bands. Water concentrations of cpx and ol were used to calculate water concentrations in the melt from which the crystals formed. Water concentrations in the parent magma were between 4.35 and 8.26 wt. % based on water concentrations in cpx, and between 8.24 and 9.41 wt. % based on those in ol. Both Mg and Fe are relatively depleted in the water- and melt inclusion-rich zones in cpx, and Ca is enriched in these zones. We suggest that oscillatory zoning in cpx is a result of repeated growth of cpx in water-richer and water-poorer boundary layers in which water lowered melt viscosity and enhanced diffusion and crystal growth rates. Water-enhanced growth rates may have resulted in preferential capture of melt inclusions preserved in water-rich cpx zones. Mg was preferentially incorporated into the cpx, causing Ca and water to build up in the boundary layer, and Mg and Fe to become relatively depleted in the boundary layer, as discussed for oscillatorially-zoned minerals by Wang and Merino (1993). Application of the equations for growth of oscillatory zones in crystals given by Wang and Merino (1993) to the growth of cpx crystals in the Powai ankaramite indicate that crystal growth occurred relatively quickly, on the order of days, although the width of the boundary zone, which is uncertain, controls the rate. These results are consistent with Wang and Merino’s contention that oscillatory growth zones in crystals can be the result of closed system processes involving advection and diffusion of ionic species into and out of the boundary zone between crystal and melt, and, on a broader scale, suggest that at least this Deccan magma was relatively hydrous.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86251", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86252" } }
{"authors":"Daniel Doolittle::Fugro Geoconsulting Inc.--Jamshid Gharib::Fugro Geoconsulting Inc.--Garrett Mitchell::Fugro Geoconsulting Inc.--", "title":"OS33A-2018: Investigating Hydrocarbon Seep Environments with High-Resolution, Three-Dimensional Geographic Visualizations.", "abstract":"Detailed photographic imagery and bathymetric maps of the seafloor acquired by deep submergence vehicles such as Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUV) and Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROV) are expanding how scientists and the public view and ultimately understand the seafloor and the processes that modify it. Several recently acquired optical and acoustic datasets, collected during ECOGIG (Ecosystem Impacts of Oil and Gas Inputs to the Gulf) and other Gulf of Mexico expeditions using the National Institute for Undersea Science Technology (NIUST) Eagle Ray, and Mola Mola AUVs, have been fused with lower resolution data to create unique three-dimensional geovisualizations. Included in these data are multi-scale and multi-resolution visualizations over hydrocarbon seeps and seep related features. Resolution of the data range from 10s of mm to 10s of m. When multi-resolution data is integrated into a single three-dimensional visual environment, new insights into seafloor and seep processes can be obtained from the intuitive nature of three-dimensional data exploration. We provide examples and demonstrate how integration of multibeam bathymetry, seafloor backscatter data, sub-bottom profiler data, textured photomosaics, and hull-mounted multibeam acoustic midwater imagery are made into a series a three-dimensional geovisualizations of actively seeping sites and associated chemosynthetic communities. From these combined and merged datasets, insights on seep community structure, morphology, ecology, fluid migration dynamics, and process geomorphology can be investigated from new spatial perspectives. Such datasets also promote valuable inter-comparisons of sensor resolution and performance.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86252", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86253" } }
{"authors":"Rebecca Lever::UC Merced--Asmeret Berhe::University of California Merced--Marilyn Fogel::University of California Merced--William Hockaday::Baylor University--Tim Kuhn::Yosemite National Park--Lauren Austin::University of Oregon - 1299--", "title":"B12D-02: Alterations to Soil and Eroded Sediment Carbon after the Rim Fire, Yosemite National Park", "abstract":"The soil system is a critical global carbon (C) pool that is under threat from both fire and erosion perturbations. In the Western United States, forecasted increases in average temperatures, as well as for extended summer growing seasons, indicate that large fuel loads and ideal fire conditions may generate more high intensity wildfires. Understanding how wildfires control soil C storage is critical for both projecting losses of soil C and how to better manage fire regimes to increase soil C storage. This research addresses a topic that has only been briefly addressed by the current body of literature – the erosion of pyrogenic C, or C which has undergone some combustion, which has the potential to affect storage of C within the soil system. The Rim Fire was a wildfire that consumed over 250,000 acres of land in Yosemite National Park and Stanislaus National Forest in 2013. After the fire, sediment traps were established on a hillslope under three treatment conditions: 1) high burn severity — high slope; 2) high burn severity — moderate slope, and; 3) moderate burn severity — high slope. Sediments were collected from these traps after every major precipitation event following the Rim Fire, Additionally, representative soils were collected from the source areas of the eroded material. Differences in chemical composition of organic matter and concentration of pyrogenic matter were determined using 13C Cross-Polarization Magic Angle Spinning (CPMAS) Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, in addition to elemental and stable isotope analysis of carbon and nitrogen. Our results show that carbon eroded from areas of higher burn intensity generally had higher concentration of aromatic functional groups, compared to moderate burn intensity areas. Differences in the form of C eroded from areas of different burn intensity and slope steepness can be used as a proxy for determining how fire severity and geomorphology dictate the amount and nature of C eroded from burned soils as sites recover.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86253", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86254" } }
{"authors":"Geraldine Klarenberg::University of Florida--", "title":"B51D-0470: Determining Stochasticity and Causality of Vegetation Dynamics in the Southwestern Amazon: Non-linear Time Series Analysis and Dynamic Factor Analysis of EVI2 Data", "abstract":"Infrastructure projects such as road paving have proven to bring a variety of (mainly) socio-economic advantages to countries and populations. However, many studies have also highlighted the negative socio-economic and biophysical effects that these developments have at local, regional and even larger scales. The “MAP” area (Madre de Dios in Peru, Acre in Brazil, and Pando in Bolivia) is a biodiversity hotspot in the southwestern Amazon where sections of South America’s Inter-Oceanic Highway were paved between 2006 and 2010. We are interested in vegetation dynamics in the area since it plays an important role in ecosystem functions and ecosystem services in socio-ecological systems: it provides information on productivity and structure of the forest. In preparation of more complex and mechanistic simulation of vegetation, non-linear time series analysis and Dynamic Factor Analysis (DFA) was conducted on Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI) time series - which is a remote sensing product and provides information on vegetation dynamics as it detects chlorophyll (productivity) and structural change. Time series of 30 years for EVI2 (from MODIS and AVHRR) were obtained for 100 communities in the area. Through specific time series cluster analysis of the vegetation data, communities were clustered to facilitate data analysis and pattern recognition. The clustering is spatially consistent, and appears to be driven by median road paving progress – which is different for each cluster. Non-linear time series analysis (multivariate singular spectrum analysis, MSSA) separates common signals (or low-dimensional attractors) across clusters. Despite the presence of this deterministic structure though, time series behavior is mostly stochastic. Granger causality analysis between EVI2 and possible response variables indicates which variables (and with what lags) are to be included in DFA, resulting in unique Dynamic Factor Models for each cluster.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86254", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86255" } }
{"authors":"Scott Minor::USGS--Jonathan Caine::USGS--Chris Fridrich::USGS--Mark Hudson::USGS--", "title":"T51E-2963: Evolution of an Interbasin Mountain-Block Extensional Accommodation Zone Within the Central Colorado Rio Grande Rift, USA", "abstract":"Our understanding of extensional strain transfer and accommodation in continental rifts has grown considerably, but few studied transfer zones exhibit high internal topographic and structural relief. In the Rio Grande rift of Colorado the WNW-trending northern tip of the Sangre de Cristo Range separates the opposite-tilted Upper Arkansas River (UAR) and San Luis half grabens. We have investigated the development and role of faults flanking this “Poncha” intrarift mountain block in transferring extension between rift basins, mountain block surface uplift, and landscape evolution. The topographically rugged Poncha block consists of Proterozoic metamorphic and plutonic rocks overlain on its west and southwest flanks by 34.5-33-Ma volcanic rocks and alluvial deposits of the Mio-Pliocene Dry Union Formation. Similar Dry Union sediments underlie a moderately elevated, strongly dissected older piedmont along the northern front of the mountain block. All of these units are tilted 10-35º to the W and SW. A WNW-trending, right-stepping fault system > 25 km in length separates the piedmont and UAR basin from the steep northern Poncha mountain front. Slip measurements along this fault system, cutting deposits as young as ~200 ka, indicate dextral-normal oblique movement. The NNW-striking, down-to-E southern Sawatch range-front fault system forms the western terminus of the Poncha block where it juxtaposes Dry Union deposits against Sawatch Proterozoic basement rocks. Gently tilted proximal diamicton and alluvial deposits on the downthrown blocks of both range-front faults likely mark Plio-Pleistocene(?) mountain block uplift. Arrays of NNW- to WNW-striking faults cutting volcanic and Dry Union units on the flanks of the Poncha block commonly have normal-oblique slip, with greater tendency for dextral strike-slip components on WNW-striking faults. Preliminary paleomagnetic data from the volcanic rocks detect no significant vertical-axis rotation that accompanied oblique-slip faulting on the Poncha flanks. W-SW tilting of the Dry Union deposits and initial uplift and erosion of the Poncha block to the east was likely associated with Mio-Pliocene movement on the southern Sawatch fault. Increasingly, however, uplift and oblique strain transfer was accommodated along the northern Poncha frontal fault.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86255", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86257" } }
{"authors":"Nihar Samal::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Wilfred Wollheim::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Robert Stewart::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Shantar Zuidema::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Alex Prousevitch::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Stanley Glidden::University of New Hampshire--", "title":"GC51E-1137: Sensitivity of New England Stream Temperatures to Air Temperature and Precipitation Under Projected Climate", "abstract":"The thermal response of streams and rivers to changing climate will influence aquatic habitat. This study examines the impact that changing climate has on stream temperatures in the Merrimack River, NH/MA USA using the Framework for Aquatic Modeling in the Earth System (FrAMES), a spatially distributed river network model driven by air temperature, air humidity, wind speed, precipitation, and solar radiation. Streamflow and water temperatures are simulated at a 45-second (latitude x longitude) river grid resolution for 135 years under historical and projected climate variability. Contemporary streamflow (Nash-Sutcliffe Coefficient = 0.77) and river temperatures (Nash-Sutcliffe Coefficient = 0.89) matched at downstream USGS gauge data well. A suite of model runs were made in combination with uniformly increased daily summer air temperatures by 2oC, 4 oC and 6 oC as well as adjusted precipitation by -40%, -30%, -20%, -10% and +10% as a sensitivity analysis to explore a broad range of potential future climates. We analyzed the summer stream temperatures and the percent of river length unsuitable for cold to warm water fish habitats. Impacts are greatest in large rivers due to the accumulation of river temperature warming throughout the entire river network. Cold water fish (i.e. brook trout) are most strongly affected while, warm water fish (i.e. largemouth bass) aren’t expected to be impacted. The changes in stream temperatures under various potential climate scenarios will provide a better understanding of the specific impact that air temperature and precipitation have on aquatic thermal regimes and habitat.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86257", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86258" } }
{"authors":"Pawan Gupta::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Robert Levy::NASA/Goddard Space Flight Ctr--Shana Mattoo::Science Systems and Applications, Inc.--", "title":"A32D-06: A modified MODIS dark-target aerosol retrieval over urban areas: Evaluation and applications", "abstract":"With amplified urbanization and industrialization during the last few decades, now more than half of the world’s population lives in urban areas. With surface particle matter (PM) concentration five or ten times higher than World Health Organization guidelines in some cities, it is very critical to accurately monitor PM air quality for global cities on a daily basis. The new version (C6) of MODIS Dark Target Land Aerosol Algorithm (MDT) provides near-daily aerosol optical depth (AOD) retrievals at 10km2 and 3km2 spatial resolutions, which can be used to estimate surface PM. However, initial validation efforts showed that MDT overestimates AOD over urban areas, primarily because the bright and complex urban surface does not meet MDT assumptions. We combined the MODIS Land Classification Product (MCD12Q1) with MODIS land surface spectral reflectance product (MOD09A1) to develop new surface characterization scheme to be used within the MDT algorithm framework. We applied the new surface characterization to the MDT algorithm, and compared the retrieved AOD with AOD observed from the ground-based AERONET’s DRAGON network operated during four DISCOVER-AQ field campaigns. AOD retrievals both in 10km and 3km spatial resolution show significant improvement over urban areas over the U.S. The bias in AOD reduced to -0.01 from 0.07, percentage of retrievals within uncertainty window increased to 85% from 62%. We will also present air quality assessment and implication of air quality monitoring in cities using revised MODIS aerosol retrievals.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86258", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86259" } }
{"authors":"Srikanth Toppaladoddi::Yale University University of Oxford--Sauro Succi::Istituto Applicazioni Calcolo--John Wettlaufer::Yale University University of Oxford--", "title":"C23B-0796: Theoretical Studies of Turbulent Transport Processes at Rough Boundaries with Application to the Interface Between Sea Ice and the Ocean", "abstract":"We study the effects of rough walls on turbulent flows to understand the coupling between the rough underside of Arctic sea ice and the ocean. Of particular relevance is the fact that the climatological thickness of Arctic sea ice is a sensitive function of the turbulent ice/ocean heat flux, which depends sensitively on the roughness of the phase boundary. We tailor the geometry of the upper boundary to manipulate the boundary layer -- interior flow interaction and study the turbulent transport of heat in two-dimensional Rayleigh-B\'enard convection with numerical simulations using the Lattice Boltzmann method. By fixing the roughness amplitude of the upper boundary and varying the wavelength λ , we find that the exponent β in the Nusselt-Rayleigh scaling relation, Nu−1∝R a β , is maximized at λ≡ λ max ≈(2π ) −1 , but decays to the planar value in both the large ( λ≫ λ max ) and small ( λ≪ λ max ) wavelength limits. The changes in the exponent originate in the nature of the coupling between the boundary layer and the interior flow. We present a simple scaling argument embodying this coupling, which describes the maximal convective heat flux.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86259", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86260" } }
{"authors":"Daniel Ricciuto::Oak Ridge National Lab--Philippe Ciais::LSCE Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et de l'Environnement--", "title":"B12D-08: Impact of extreme climate events on European Biome carbon sequestration", "abstract":"Here we discuss the impact of extreme climate events on European Biome carbon sequestration through synthesis of observation datasets.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86260", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86261" } }
{"authors":"JohnFranco Saraceno::USGS California Water Science Center Sacramento--James Shanley::U.S. Geological Survey--", "title":"B11F-0498: Contrasting dissolved organic carbon dynamics at two forested catchments interpreted from high-frequency optical sensor measurements", "abstract":"Stream dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentrations can change rapidly during high-flow events. The timing and magnitude of these changes relative to the event hydrograph can yield insights about possible DOC sources its flow paths to the stream. In situ fluorescent dissolved organic matter (FDOM) sensors that generate high-frequency observations enable detailed examination of high-flow DOC- discharge hysteresis. In this presentation, we interpret high-flow DOC dynamics at two of the five U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) Water, Energy, and Biogeochemical Budgets (WEBB) sites – Panola Mountain, Georgia and Sleepers River, Vermont. Based on laboratory analyses of weekly and event grab samples, both USGS WEBB sites had a similar DOC ranges: from ~1 milligrams per liter (mg/L) at base flow to ~11-15 mg/L during the largest events. A curvilinear relationship between DOC and FDOM (corrected for temperature and turbidity interferences) was used to model a continuous time series of DOC. At the Sleepers River site, DOC showed a seasonal pattern of increasing DOC response; from fairly subdued during spring snowmelt, to a maximum during autumn leaf-fall. The DOC response to discharge showed a consistent clockwise hysteresis (DOC peak, lagged discharge peak). At the Panola Mountain site, maximum event DOC response was lower during wet conditions in the winter and spring. Hysteresis was less expressed at Panola Mountain relative to Sleepers River and displayed both clockwise and counterclockwise patterns, which were dependent on antecedent moisture conditions. The greater synchrony of DOC and discharge peaks at Panola Mountain suggests that DOC sources are closer to the stream and (or) move to the stream more quickly, than at Sleepers River.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86261", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86262" } }
{"authors":"Leon Yin::New York University--Cassandra Kopans-Johnson::Horace Mann School--Allegra LeGrande::NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies--Susan Kelly::Henry Abbott Technical High School--", "title":"ED33D-0960: Understanding Spatial and Temporal Variations of Arctic Circulation Using Oxygen Isotopes of Seawater", "abstract":"The isotopic ratio of 18O to 16O in seawater (2005ppm in ocean water is defined as 𝛿18Oseawater≡0 permil or 0‰) is a fundamental ocean tracer due to its distinct linear relationship with salinity(𝛿18O -S) from regional inland freshwater sources. As opposed to salinity alone, 𝛿18O distinguishes river runoff from sea-ice melt and traces ocean circulation pathways from coastal to open waters and surface to deep waters. Observations from the past 60 years of 𝛿18O seawater were compiled into a database by Schimdt et al. (1999), and subsequently used to calculate a 3-dimensional 1°x1° 𝛿18O global gridded dataset by LeGrande and Schmidt (2006). Although the Schmidt et al. (1999) Global Seawater Oxygen-18 Database (𝛿18Oobs) contains 25,514 measurements used to calculate the global gridded dataset, LeGrande and Schmidt (2006) point out that, “data coverage varies greatly from region to region,” with seasonal variability creating biases in areas where sea ice is present. Python Pandas is used to automate the addition of 2,942 records to the Schmidt et al. (1999) Global Seawater Oxygen-18 Database (𝛿18Oobs), and examine the spatial and temporal distributions of 18O in the Arctic Ocean. 10 initial water masses are defined using spatial and temporal trends, clusters of observations, and Arctic surface circulation. Jackknife slope analysis of water mass 𝛿18O -S is used to determine anomalous data points and regional hydrology, resulting in 4 distinct Arctic water masses. These techniques are used to improve the gridded 𝛿18Oseawater dataset by distinguishing unique water masses, and accounting for seasonal variability of complex high latitude areas.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86262", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86263" } }
{"authors":"Mingqi LI::IGSNRR Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research, CAS--Shao Xuemei::IGSNRR Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research, CAS--Zhi-Yong Yin::University of San Diego--Xingguo Xu::Qinghai Provincial Institute of Cultural Relics and Archaeology--", "title":"GC11E-1074: Tree-Ring Dating of the Reshui-1 Tomb in Dulan County, Qinghai Province, North-west China", "abstract":"Tuyuhun and Tubo were two important states that thrived in north-western China during AD 311-900 in parallel with the Han Chinese dynasties of Sui and Tang periods. The Reshui Tomb Cluster located in Dulan County of the north-eastern Tibetan Plateau is an important cultural relic of the Tuyuhun-Tubo age. The official excavations of the Reshui tombs were regarded as top events in archaeology in the 1980s and 1990s in China. The Reshui-1 Tomb is the largest one among the tombs in the area. Since its excavation, there have been debates on whether the owner of the tomb belonged to the Tuyuhun or Tubo ethnicity. Therefore, accurately dating the Reshui-1 Tomb has a critical place in studying the Tubo and Tuyuhun histories. We collected 7 discs and 11 increment cores of Qilian juniper (Juniperus przewalskii Kom.) from the exposed and fallen beams of the roof of the Reshui-1Tomb. The lengths of the 16 tree-ring records are between 69 and 152 years. Based on a previously developed master dating chronology using Qilian juniper samples from the eastern Qaidam Basin, the calendar dates of the 16 specimens were determined by the COFECHA program and visual dating procedure. The average inter-series correlation among the dated sample series is 0.696, indicating good quality of cross-dating. The year of the outermost rings is AD 715 for the 7 discs and 4 out of the 9 increment cores. Moreover, the ring-width variations of the samples are consistent with the existing chronologies from the region. The presence of late-wood of AD 715 in the samples indicated that the Reshui-1 Tomb was completed in late AD 715 or early 716, which means that the Reshui-1 Tomb was finished in the Tubo age. This date provides direct evidence for archaeologists to determine the owner’s ethnicity and identify of the Reshui-1 Tomb.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86263", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86264" } }
{"authors":"George Hilley::Stanford University--Felipe Aron::Stanford University--Curtis Baden::Stanford University--Chris Castillo::Stanford University--Samuel Johnstone::Stanford University--Johanna Nevitt::Stanford University--Timothy McHargue::Stanford University--Charles Paull::Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute--Robert Sare::Stanford University--Lauren Shumaker::Stanford University--Holly Young::Stanford University--", "title":"T42A-08: Oceanic Transform Fault-Zone Geomorphology in the Gulf of California from High-Resolution Bathymetric Data", "abstract":"We use high-resolution, deep-water bathymetry to examine the structure of, and offset along, transform faults in the Gulf of California. These data provide detailed observations of fault-zone geomorphology of an active transform fault hosted in an area transitioning from continental to oceanic crust. Bathymetric data were collected by an autonomous underwater vehicle deployed by the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute in 2012. Dense ocean-bottom point clouds allowed construction of an ~1-m-resolution digital terrain model, which provides comparable spatial resolution to early airborne laser swath mapping surveys. The data reveal a set of complex, multi-stranded fault zones, whose morphologies suggest a temporal migration of deformation between individual strands contained within an up to 1 km wide zone, similar to complex fault zones observed within continental crust in subaerial environments. Individual fault strands show restraining steps that create positive relief along the ocean floor in their vicinity. Although the depositional nature of these deep-water systems makes identification of offset features challenging, we found a series of offset fans along a fault strand with consistent right-lateral offsets of 17-21 m. These are likely multi-event offsets, given the length of the transform segments and magnitudes of historically recorded earthquakes in the region. The consistency of these multi-event offsets suggests that an external process predating the displacement of the fans, such as seismic shaking due to large earthquakes, may be responsible for the synchroneity of these features. Our study demonstrates that the fault-zone geomorphology of oceanic transform faults in the Gulf of California bears resemblance to that of terrestrial strike-slip faults hosted in continental crust, and that high-resolution, deep water bathymetry can provide information about the earthquake history of these environments.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86264", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86265" } }
{"authors":"Carlos Huerta-Lopez::University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez--Denny Torres-Ortíz::University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez--Avelina Fernández-Heredia::Instituto Tecnológico de Tijuana, ITT--José Martínez-Cruzado::University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez--", "title":"S13D-08: Analysis of Seismic Activity of the last 15 Years Nearby Puerto Rico and Caribbean Region.", "abstract":"An earthquake catalog of the seismicity occurred during the last 15 years in the Caribbean region, nearby the vicinity of Puerto Rico Island (PRI) was compiled in order to capture the big picture of the regional seismic activity ratio and in particular at the epicentral regions of several historical and instrumentally recorded (during 2008-20015) large to moderate magnitude earthquakes occurred nearby PRI in onshore and offshore, which include the M6.4 earthquake of 01/13/2014, the largest earthquake recorded instrumentally nearby PRI. From the point of view of joint temporal-spatial distribution of epicenters, episodic temporal-spatial seismic activity is clearly seen as temporal-spatial concentrations during certain time intervals in different regions. These localized concentrations of epicenters that occur during certain time intervals in well localized/concentrated regions may suggest “seismic gaps” that shows no regular time interval, neither spatial pattern. In the epicentral region of the M6.4 01/13/2014 earthquake and the historical Mona Passage M7.5 earthquake of 10/11/1918, episodic concentrations in time and space of small magnitude earthquakes epicenters is evident, however do not show temporal pattern. Preliminary results of statistical analysis of an ongoing research in terms of the parameter b (Gutenberg-Richter relationship), and the Omori’s law with the aim to relate the tectonic framework of the region (or sub-regions) such as structural heterogeneity stress are here presented/discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86265", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86266" } }
{"authors":"Mark Schildhauer::National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis--", "title":"IN53B-1842: Sharing meanings: developing interoperable semantic technologies to enhance reproducibility in earth and environmental science research", "abstract":"Earth and environmental scientists are familiar with the entities, processes, and theories germane to their field of study, and comfortable collecting and analyzing data in their area of interest. Yet, while there appears to be consistency and agreement as to the scientific “terms” used to describe features in their data and analyses, aside from a few fundamental physical characteristics—such as mass or velocity-- there can be broad tolerances, if not considerable ambiguity, in how many earth science “terms” map to the underlying “concepts” that they actually represent. This ambiguity in meanings, or “semantics”, creates major problems for scientific reproducibility. It greatly impedes the ability to replicate results—by making it difficult to determine the specifics of the intended meanings of terms such as deforestation or carbon flux -- as to scope, composition, magnitude, etc. In addition, semantic ambiguity complicates assemblage of comparable data for reproducing results, due to ambiguous or idiosyncratic labels for measurements, such as percent cover of forest, where the term “forest” is undefined; or where a reported output of “total carbon-emissions” might just include CO2 emissions, but not methane emissions. In this talk, we describe how the NSF-funded DataONE repository for earth and environmental science data (http://dataone.org), is using W3C-standard languages (RDF/OWL) to build an ontology for clarifying concepts embodied in heterogeneous data and model outputs. With an initial focus on carbon cycling concepts using terrestrial biospheric model outputs and LTER productivity data, we describe how we are achieving interoperability with “semantic vocabularies” (or ontologies) from aligned earth and life science domains, including OBO-foundry ontologies such as ENVO and BCO; the ISO/OGC O&M; and the NSF Earthcube GeoLink project. Our talk will also discuss best practices that may be helpful for other groups interested in constructing their own ontologies. Interoperability of community vocabularies will facilitate reproducibility in the earth and environmental sciences, by clarifying when data and results are comparable, as opposed to when we might be using the same term to mean different things, or using different terms to mean the same thing.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86266", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86267" } }
{"authors":"Yibo Li::Northwest A&F University--Xiaoyi Ma::Northwest A&F University--", "title":"B53G-0660: The range of β in the distributed-order infiltration into swelling soils and ponding time texted in the field experiments", "abstract":"Theoretical research and experimental analysis of the process that how water into the soil surface, that is infiltration, has profound implications for water-efficient irrigation both in hydrology science and soil physics due to the global water shortage and the rising demand for food. However, the majorities of previous work on infiltration equations are generally based on the assumption that soils are rigid objects and then overlook the realistic properties of swelling-shrinking properties and anomalous diffusion of natural soils, resulting in inaccurate prediction of infiltration. After the new general equation of flow in swelling soils based on the fractional calculus in a material coordinate was presented in 2010, heated research are conducted in the following years among which the parameter β is the hottest topic that has no doubt responses the physical properties of the soil and need further discussion. In such cases, we measured, for the first time, the range of parameter β with data collected from field experiments and the results show that the range of β is 0 to 2. In addition, we simulate the infiltration and analyze the spatial and temporal variability of parameters. Afterwards, we presented a new formula for the time to ponding with parameters from fractional Fokker-Planck equation (fFPE) and simulated ponding time under different rainfall intensity in Loess Plateau.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86267", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86268" } }
{"authors":"Jeffrey Severinghaus::Scripps Institution of Oceanography--", "title":"B51A-0410: First krypton-81 dating of glacial ice at Taylor Glacier, Antarctica", "abstract":"A long-held dream of glaciologists has been the direct radiometric dating of ancient glacial ice. Carbon-14 is unfortunately complicated by in-situ cosmogenic production of this isotope from cosmic ray spallation on oxygen nuclei in the ice. Krypton-81 is an ideal tracer in several ways: it has no anthropogenic sources, is made in the atmosphere by cosmic ray spallation on stable krypton nuclei, and it has a half-life of 229 kyr, which is a useful age range for ancient glacial ice samples. However, the abundance of krypton-81 is dauntingly low. Recent analytical advances by a team of physicists at Argonne National Labs has now made it possible to measure practical quantities of ice (50 kg) by Atom Trap Trace Analysis (ATTA), a technique using lasers to cool krypton-81 atoms to absolute zero and trap them, enabling accurate counting of single atoms. The precision attained by this technique approaches 0.5%, implying an age accuracy of about 1000 yr for samples from the last interglacial period. Here we show that krypton-81 dating has been successfully applied for the first time, to an outcrop of ancient ice dating from the last interglacial period (125 kyr BP) at Taylor Glacier, Antarctica, which is independently dated using methane and d18O of atmospheric oxygen for stratigraphic matching to well-dated Chinese speleothem records.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86268", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86270" } }
{"authors":"Grant Weinkam::University of Florida--", "title":"PA21C-2175: Sustainable Phosphorus Management in Land Applied Reclaimed Water Scenarios", "abstract":"Florida leads the nation in wastewater effluent/reclaimed water use, at over 700 million gallons per day, of which 75% is land applied. While these effluent waters are treated to reduce pathogen loads, phosphorus (P) concentrations can still be substantial in long term application scenarios. Currently an estimated 1.5 million kg of P are reintroduced to the landscape yearly (at effluent = 2 mg P/L), compared to only 23,000 kg that would be applied if landscapes were irrigated with ground water (at ground water = 0.03 mg P/L). Research suggests that under long term applications of P systems can reach a state at which they are no longer able to assimilate further loading, potentially resulting in landscapes that are actively leaching and eroding P rich particulate matter to receiving hydrologic systems. This can be especially relevant in Florida given the large proportion of sandy soils that contain, relatively, low physical and chemical ion exchange capacity and high hydraulic conductivity, thus increasing the potential for water quality impairment. Due to increasingly stringent surface water P concentrations allowances, and the many uncertainties regarding the long term fate and transport of P, this research seeks to determine how different soil conditions and reclaimed water loading amounts can alter P leaching profiles in Florida. Field sampling at reclaimed water sprayfield sites are used to determine the relative change in P sequestration potential using soil-phosphorus saturation capacity (SPSC) analyses and potential leaching risk is determined by soil core experimentation. The resulting information improves fundamental understanding of soil-phosphorus transport dynamics and provides insights into alternative techniques for long term environmental sustainability of reclaimed wastewater usage.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86270", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86271" } }
{"authors":"Elizabeth Walsh::University of Texas at El Paso--Thomas Gill::University of Texas at El Paso--Jose Rivas Jr.::University of Texas at El Paso--Ming-Ying Leung::University of Texas at El Paso--Jon Mohl::University of Texas at El Paso--", "title":"EP43A-0964: Environmental Sequencing of Biotic Components of Dust in the Chihuahuan Desert", "abstract":"A growing number of studies mark the role of wind in dispersing biota. Most of these approaches have used traditional methods to assess taxonomic diversity. Here we used next generation sequencing to characterize microbiota in dust collected from the Chihuahuan Desert. Atmospheric dust was collected during events during 2011-2014 using dry deposition collectors placed at two sites in El Paso Co., TX. In parallel experiments, we rehydrated subsamples of dust and conducted PCR amplifications using conserved primers for 16S and 18S ribosomal genes. Sequenced reads were de-multiplexed, quality filtered, and processed using QIIME. Taxonomy was assigned based on pairwise identity using BLAST for microbial eukaryotes. All samples were rarefied to a set number of sequences per sample prior to downstream analyses. Bioinformatic analysis of four of the dust samples yielded a diversity of biota, including zooplankton, bacteria, fungi, algae, and protists, but fungi predominate (>90% of both 10K and 3K reads). In our rehydrations of dust samples from the U.S. southwest nematodes, gastrotrichs, tardigrades, monogonont and bdelloid rotifers, branchiopods and numerous ciliates have been recovered. Variability in genetic diversity among samples is based, in part, on the source and extent of the particular dust event. We anticipate the same patterns will be seen in the complete data set. These preliminary results indicate that wind is a major transporter of not only fungi, bacteria and other unicellular organisms but may also be important in shaping the distribution patterns of multi-cellular organisms such as those that inhabit aquatic environments in the arid southwestern US.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86271", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86272" } }
{"authors":"Matthias Kohler::USGS California Water Science Center Menlo Park--Douglas Kent::USGS California Water Science Center Menlo Park--Barbara Bekins::USGS Western Regional Offices Menlo Park--Isabelle Cozzarelli::USGS--Gene-Hua Ng::University of Minnesota--", "title":"B21C-0463: Identifying and Quantifying Chemical Forms of Sediment-Bound Ferrous Iron.", "abstract":"Aqueous Fe(II) produced by dissimilatory iron reduction comprises only a small fraction of total biogenic Fe(II) within an aquifer. Most biogenic Fe(II) is bound to sediments on ion exchange sites; as surface complexes and, possibly, surface precipitates; or incorporated into solid phases (e.g., siderite, magnetite). Different chemical forms of sediment-bound Fe(II) have different reactivities (e.g., with dissolved oxygen) and their formation or destruction by sorption/desorption and precipitation/dissolution is coupled to different solutes (e.g., major cations, H+, carbonate). We are quantifying chemical forms of sediment-bound Fe(II) using previously published extractions, novel extractions, and experimental studies (e.g., Fe isotopic exchange). Sediments are from Bemidji, Minnesota, where biodegradation of hydrocarbons from a burst oil pipeline has driven extensive dissimilatory Fe(III) reduction, and sites potentially impacted by unconventional oil and gas development. Generally, minimal Fe(II) was mobilized from ion exchange sites (batch desorption with MgCl2 and repeated desorption with NH4Cl). A < 2mm sediment fraction from the iron-reducing zone at Bemidji had 1.8umol/g Fe(II) as surface complexes or carbonate phases (sodium acetate at pH 5) of which ca. 13% was present as surface complexes (FerroZine extractions). Total bioavailable Fe(III) and biogenic Fe(II) (HCl extractions) was 40-50 umole/g on both background and iron-reducing zone sediments . Approximately half of the HCl-extractable Fe from Fe-reducing zone sediments was Fe(II) whereas 12 - 15% of Fe extracted from background sediments was present as Fe(II). One-third to one-half of the total biogenic Fe(II) extracted from sediments collected from a Montana prairie pothole located downgradient from a produced-water disposal pit was present as surface-complexed Fe(II).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86272", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86273" } }
{"authors":"Noah Randolph-Flagg::University of California Berkeley--Stephen Breen::University of California Berkeley--Andres Hernandez::University of California Berkeley--Stephen Self::University of California Berkeley--Michael Manga::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"NG14A-08: Evenly-spaced columns in the Bishop Tuff as relicts of hydrothermal convection", "abstract":"A few square km of the Bishop Tuff in eastern California, USA have evenly spaced erosional columns. These columns are more resistant to erosion due to the precipitation of the low-temperature zeolite (120-200 ºC), mordenite, which is not found in the surrounding tuff. Similar features observed in the Bandelier Tuff were hypothesized to form when cold water from above infiltrated into the still-hot tuff interior. This water would become gravitationally unstable and produced convection with steam upwellings and liquid water downwellings. These downwellings became cemented with mordenite while the upwellings were too dry for chemical reactions. We use two methods to quantitatively assess this hypothesis. First, scaling that ignores the effects of latent heat and mineral precipitation suggests the Rayleigh number (Ra, a measure of convective vigor) for this system is ~103 well above the critical Ra of 4π2. Second, to account for the effect of multiphase flow and latent heat, we use two-dimensional numerical models in the finite difference code HYDROTHERM. We find that the geometry of flow is consistent with field observations and confirm that geometry is sensitive to permeability and topography. These tests suggest a few things about low-pressure hydrothermal systems. 1) The geometry of at least some convection appears to be broadly captured by linear stability theory that ignores reactive transport, heterogeneity of host rock, and the effects of latent heat. 2) Topographic flow sets the wavelength of convection meaning that these columns formed somewhere without topography—probably a lake. Finally, these observations imply a wet paleoclimate in the Eastern Sierra namely that, in the aftermath of the Long Valley eruption, either rain or snow was able to pool in the caldera before the tuff cooled on the order of a hundred years after the eruption. ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86273", "section":"Nonlinear Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86274" } }
{"authors":"David Klumpar::Montana State University--", "title":"EP52B-05: Heliophysics Applications of CubeSats at Montana State University", "abstract":"Technologies applicable to the miniaturization of satellites accompanied by the simultaneous development of standardized launch deployment systems have enabled unique focused research in Heliophysics to be carried out with sub-10 kg-class free flying satellites. Montana State University (MSU) is among the first institutions to have applied these emergent capabilities to the development of CubeSats for scientific research. Since its founding in 2001, MSU’s Space Science and Engineering Laboratory (SSEL) has designed, built, space qualified, and delivered for launch seven increasingly more capable scientific satellites, all carrying payloads directed toward further understanding of the Geospace environment. Each development cycle led to the launch of one, or more satellites with greater technological sophistication and more scientific capability than it’s predecessor(s). The presentation will trace the spiral development of our series of scientific research satellites that aim to further elucidate the dynamical behavior of the energetic charged particle radiation environment near-Earth, culminating with the twin FIREBIRD-II satellites launched on January 31st 2015. Scientific insights revealed by the ongoing Focused Investigation of Relativistic Electron Burst, Intensity, Range, and Dynamics mission include the first correlative measurements of the spatio-temporal coherence of relativistic electron microbursts from two satellites at spatial separations ranging from 10 km to >1000 km; stationary or slowly evolving electron precipitation walls; and both forward and reverse dispersive electron precipitation bursts. FIREBIRD-provided scientific insights serve to illustrate the value of CubeSats for performing focused targeted investigations that lead to deeper insights on the Geospace environment.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86274", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86275" } }
{"authors":"Thomas Bullard::Desert Research Institute--Steven Bacon::Desert Research Institute--Vaughn Kimball::Idaho Power Company--", "title":"EP41A-0920: Geomorphic Parameters for Developing a Hydrologic Model to Infer Holocene Climate Variability, Middle Snake River near Bliss, Idaho", "abstract":"The geomorphology and stratigraphy preserved in a canyon reach of the Middle Snake River provide model parameter constraints for estimating Holocene paleohydrology. Channel constrictions, which acted as hydraulic weirs throughout the Holocene, were created in this reach by the Bonneville Flood (~17.5 ka) that left very large (>10 m) slabs of basalt and 2–3 m diameter boulder deposits near the canyon floor. Post-Bonneville Flood landforms and deposits that formed during the Holocene are situated less than ~30 m above river level (arl) in this reach and include fluvial and boulder terraces, alluvial fans, and incised tributary alluvial units. Relative topographic position of these geomorphic features, cross-cutting relations, multiple buried soils, depositional and erosional contacts, and radiocarbon dates from terraces (Qt) and alluvial fans provide a geomorphic and stratigraphic framework and a Holocene chronology for this area. The relative stratigraphic position of a massive silty sand that overlies Bonneville Flood gravel in Qt5 (~20 m arl) and Qt4 (~10 m arl) deposits and comprises all of Qt3 (~5 m arl) deposits indicates changes in Holocene discharge; longitudinal profiles of fluvial terraces graded to hydraulic constrictions provide reasonable estimates of paleo-stage. Fifteen radiocarbon dates yielded ages of ~8670 and ~3500 cal yr BP for Qt4 deposits and ~1100 and ~100 cal yr BP for Qt3 deposits and help define periods of episodic cutting and filling. Timing of Qt4 and Qt3 cut-and-fill episodes and alluvial fan formation correlates well with Holocene global and regional paleoclimate events inferred from Great Basin lake histories including wet periods from ~9.0 to 8.0 ka and ~4.2 to 2.5 ka, the Medieval Climatic Anomaly (~1.2 to 0.8 ka), and the Little Ice Age (~0.3 to 0.6 ka). The fluvial geomorphology documented in this study will be used to develop a watershed-scale hydrologic model to infer paleoprecipitation in the region during the Holocene.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86275", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86276" } }
{"authors":"Ryunosuke Tawatari::Tokyo Institute of Technology--Chihiro Miyazaki::Tokyo Institute of Technology--Yoshihiko Iseri::Tokyo Institute of Technology--Masashi Kiguchi::University of Tokyo--Shinjiro Kanae::Tokyo Institute of Technology--", "title":"NH51C-1915: Global Projection of Coastal Exposure Associated with Sea-level Rise beyond Tipping Points", "abstract":"Sea-level rise due to global warming becomes a great matter of concern for global coastal area. Additionally, it has reported in fifth report of IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) that deglaciation of Greenland ice sheet and Antarctic ice sheet would occur rapidly and enhance sea-level rise if temperature passes certain “Tipping point”. In terms of projecting damage induced by sea-level rise globally, some previous studies focused on duration until mainly 2100. Furthermore long-term estimations on centuries to millennial climatic response of the ice sheets which are supposed to be triggered within this or next century would be also important to think about future climate and lifestyle in coastal .  In this study, I estimated the long term sea-level which take into account the tipping points of Greenland ice sheet (1.4℃) as sum of 4 factors (thermal expansion, glacier and ice cap, Greenland ice sheet, Antarctic ice sheet). The sea-level follows 4 representative concentration pathways up to 3000 obtained through literature reviewing since there were limited available sea-level projections up to 3000. I also estimated a number of affected population lives in coastal area up to 3000 with using the estimated sea-level. The cost for damage, adaptation and mitigation would be also discussed. These estimations would be useful when decision-makers propose policies for construction of dikes and proposing mitigation plans for sustainable future. The result indicates there would be large and relatively rapid increases in both sea-level rise and coastal exposure if global mean temperature passes the tipping point of Greenland ice sheet. However the tipping points, melting rate and timescale of response are highly uncertain and still discussed among experts. Thus more precise and credible information is required for further accurate estimation of long-term sea-level rise and population exposure in the future.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86276", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86277" } }
{"authors":"Ashley Ciglar::University of California Irvine--Megan Rippy::University of California Irvine--Stanley Grant::University of California Irvine--", "title":"H13L-1767: Modeling Fecal Indicator Bacteria Like Salt in Newport Bay", "abstract":"Newport Bay is a harbor and estuary located in Orange County, CA that provides many water sports and recreational activities for millions of southern California residents and tourists. The aim of this study is to quickly assess exceedances of FIB in the Newport Bay which pose a health risk to recreational users. The ability to quickly assess water quality is made possible with an advection-diffusion mass transport model that uses easily measurable parameters such as volumetric flow rate from tributaries. Current FIB assessment methods for Newport Bay take a minimum of 24 hours to evaluate health risk by either culturing for FIB or running a more complex fluid dynamics model. By this time the FIB may have already reached the ocean outlet thus no longer posing a risk in the bay or recreationists may have already come in close contact with contaminated waters. The advection-diffusion model can process and disseminate health risk information within a few hours of flow rate measurements, minimizing time between an FIB exceedance and public awareness about the event. Data used to calibrate and validate the model was collected from January 2006 through February 2007. Salinity data was used for calibration and FIB data was used for validation. Both steady-state and transient conditions were assessed to determine if dry weather patterns can be simplified to the steady-state condition.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86277", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86278" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"B41C-0446: Time-Lapse Geophysical Measurements targeting Spatial and Temporal Variability in Biogenic Gas Production from Peat Soils in a Hydrologically Controlled Wetland in the Florida Everglades", "abstract":"Peat soils are known to release globally significant amounts of methane (CH4) and carbon dioxide (CO2) to the atmosphere. However, uncertainties still remain regarding the spatio-temporal distribution of gas accumulations and triggering mechanisms of gas releasing events. Furthermore, most research on peatland gas dynamics has traditionally been focused on high latitude peatlands. Therefore, understanding gas dynamics in low-latitude peatlands (e.g. the Florida Everglades) is key to global climate research. Recent studies in the Everglades have demonstrated that biogenic gas flux values may vary when considering different temporal and spatial scales of measurements. The work presented here targets spatial variability in gas production and release at the plot scale in an approximately 85 m2 area, and targets temporal variability with data collected during the spring months of two different years. This study is located in the Loxahatchee Impoundment Landscape Assessment (LILA), a hydrologically controlled, landscape scale (30 Ha) model of the Florida Everglades. Ground penetrating radar (GPR) has been used in the past to investigate biogenic gas dynamics in peat soils, and is used in this study to monitor changes of in situ gas storage. Each year, a grid of GPR profiles was collected to image changes in gas distribution in 2d on a weekly basis, and several flux chambers outfitted with time-lapse cameras captured high resolution (hourly) gas flux measurements inside the GPR grid. Combining these methods allows us to use a mass balance approach to estimate spatial variability in gas production rates, and capture temporal variability in gas flux rates.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86278", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86279" } }
{"authors":"Janise Rodgers::GeoHazards International--L. Thomas Tobin::Tobin & Associates--Veronica Cedillos::Applied Technology Council--Karma Tshering::GeoHazards International--Hari Kumar::GeoHazards International--Brian Tucker::GeoHazards International--Julie Jomo::--", "title":"PA21B-2162: What Do We Tell People to Do during Earthquake Shaking in Emerging Countries? A Multidisciplinary Approach", "abstract":"Providing advice on what to do during shaking in developing nations with high earthquake hazard and vulnerable buildings is a daunting task at the intersection of public policy and science. In areas where most buildings are masonry, earthen or concrete and are at high risk of collapse in strong shaking, advice may differ from the “Drop, Cover and Hold On” message given where residential construction is light timber (less lethal) and building codes are enforced. People in emerging countries are often unsure whether to evacuate or “run out” of the building, or to remain inside and protect oneself with Drop, Cover and Hold On, going to a marked “Safe Zone” or one of several other actions. GeoHazards International approached this problem by bringing together scientific research from multiple disciplines: seismology, epidemiology, structural engineering, risk communication, and sociology. We brought together researchers and practitioners, who applied scientific principles and professional judgment to the limited data on effectiveness of various protective actions in emerging countries. We developed guidance on what message creators and policymakers should consider; the process for developing message content and forms; and the people to involve. A responsible message must account for not only the local tectonic environment and site conditions, but also building vulnerability, the presence of safe open space, how people are killed and injured in earthquakes, population exposure, and the beliefs, customs and social context that affect how messages are received and acted upon. We found that local agencies should make a policy decision on the appropriate action, based on local scientific and technical information, because no one protective action will protect the majority in every context. The safest specific action varies according to where people are located, whether they will be safer where they are or by moving, and whether they can make it to the safer place before shaking becomes too strong. We plan to conduct a field test of our guidance process in Haiti, where we will help local agencies create and disseminate messages. GHI’s protective actions guidance illustrates how scientific research from multiple disciplines can combine to achieve broader impact, in this case via public safety messaging.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86279", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86280" } }
{"authors":"Ian Gagnon::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Martin Wosnik::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Kenneth Baldwin::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Erin Bell::Univ New Hampshire--", "title":"GC53C-1218: Tidal Energy Conversion Installation at an Estuarine Bridge Site: Resource Evaluation and Energy Production Estimate", "abstract":"The “Living Bridge” project aims to create a self-diagnosing, self-reporting “smart bridge” powered by a local renewable energy source, tidal energy – transforming Memorial Bridge, a vertical lift bridge over the tidal Piscataqua River connecting Portsmouth, NH and Kittery, ME, into a living laboratory for researchers, engineers, scientists, and the community. The Living Bridge project includes the installation of a tidal turbine at the Memorial Bridge. The energy converted by the turbine will power structural health monitoring, environmental and underwater instrumentation. Utilizing locally available tidal energy can make bridge operation more sustainable, can “harden” transportation infrastructure against prolonged grid outages and can demonstrate a prototype of an “estuarine bridge of the future”. A spatio-temporal tidal energy resource assessment was performed using long term bottom-deployed Acoustic Doppler Current Profilers (ADCP) at two locations: near the planned deployment location in 2013-14 for 123 days and mid-channel in 2007 for 35 days. Data were evaluated to determine the amount of available kinetic energy that can be converted into usable electrical energy on the bridge. Changes in available kinetic energy with ebb/flood and spring/neap tidal cycles and electrical energy demand were analyzed. The target deployment site exhibited significantly more energetic ebb tides than flood tides, which can be explained by the local bathymetry of the tidal estuary. A system model is used to calculate the net energy savings using various tidal generator and battery bank configurations. Different resource evaluation methodologies were also analyzed, e.g., using a representative ADCP “bin” vs.\ a more refined, turbine-geometry-specific methodology, and using static bin height vs. bin height that move w.r.t. the free surface throughout a tidal cycle (representative of a bottom-fixed or floating turbine deployment, respectively). ADCP operating frequencies and bin sizes affect the standard deviation of measurements, and measurement uncertainties are evaluated. The planned installation, consisting of a vertical axis turbine with the generator above water, mounted to a floating platform, and underwater instrumentation will be outlined. Supported by NSF-IIP 1430260", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86280", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86281" } }
{"authors":"David Miller::Brown University--Paul Wojtal::Brown University--Mary O'Connor::Brown University--Sydney Clark::Brown University--Meredith Hastings::Brown Univ-Geological Sciences--", "title":"B13G-0721: Spatio-temporal variability in isotopic signatures of atmospheric NOx emissions from vehicles", "abstract":"Atmospheric nitrogen oxides (NOx = NO + NO2) play key roles in atmospheric chemistry and radiative forcing. Their oxidation products, nitric acid or nitrate, have significant contributions to nitrogen (N) deposition, with implications for ecosystem health. On-road vehicle NOx sources currently dominate U.S. anthropogenic emission budgets, yet vehicle NOx emissions contributions to local and regional N deposition patterns are highly uncertain. NOx isotopic signatures offer a potentially valuable observational tool to trace source contributions to N deposition. We characterize the spatio-temporal variability of vehicle NOx emission isotopic signatures with a field and laboratory-verified technique for actively capturing NOx in solution to quantify the nitrogen isotopic composition (δ15N-NOx) to within ±1.5‰ (1σ) precision. We present a novel combination of on-road mobile and stationary urban δ15N-NOx measurements at minutes to hourly resolution along with NOx and CO2 concentration measurements. We evaluate spatial gradients of δ15N-NOx on U.S. Northeast and Midwest highways, including six urban metropolitan areas and rural interstate highways during summer and autumn. We also assess on-road diurnal δ15N-NOx variations over ~800 km driving distance in Providence, RI by targeting the upwind footprint of urban background measurements to distinguish background and source NOx. We observe on-road δ15N-NOx signatures range from -3 to -10‰ under different traffic conditions in the U.S. Northeast and Midwest. On-road δ15N-NOx daytime variations from -3 to -6‰ agree well with simultaneous urban background sampling in Providence, RI, suggesting that vehicles dominate NOx emissions in this region. We use these datasets to estimate the range of representative δ15N-NOx source signatures for U.S. vehicle fleet-integrated emission plumes. Our novel approach suggests that previously reported isotopic signatures for vehicle NOx are not necessarily representative. These results have implications for evaluating isotopic signature ranges for distinguishing vehicle NOx sources and tracking NOx emission contributions to local and regional N deposition.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86281", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86283" } }
{"authors":"Falguni Patadia::Goddard Earth Sciences Technology and Research--Robert Levy::NASA/Goddard Space Flight Ctr--Shana Mattoo::Science Systems and Applications, Inc.--Steven Platnick::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--", "title":"A31D-0075: Accounting for High-biases in the MODIS Aerosol Optical Depth Retrieval", "abstract":"Aerosol optical depth retrieved from observations made by the MODIS instrument, onboard Terra and Aqua satellites, has been extensively validated against ground based AERONET AOD. Global validation of the current Collection 6 (C6) AOD over ocean indicates that 68% of retrieved AOD agrees to within 0.03 ± 10% * AERONET AOD. However there does exist high bias in MODIS AOD retrievals. There are a number of reasons for over-estimation. One is cloud contamination, which is where undetected clouds are retrieved as aerosol. A second is 3D radiative effects, where observed radiance is enhanced due to scattering from clouds. Here we parse out and attempt to quantify the contributions from the cloud contamination in AOD retrieval over ocean. Among other reasons for high bias are wrong aerosol models, improper surface characterization, error in local windspeed data and adjacency effects.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86283", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86284" } }
{"authors":"So Young Chon::Organization Not Listed--Michael Puma::Columbia University--", "title":"GC33C-1312: Susceptibility of South Korea to hydrologic extremes affecting the global food system", "abstract":"Food security in South Korea is closely linked to trade in the global food system. The country’s production of major grains declined from 5.8 million metric tons (mmt) in 1998 to 4.8 mmt in 2014, which coincided with a shift in grain self sufficiency from 43% down to 24% over this same period. Many factors led to these changes, including reductions in domestic agricultural land, governmental policies supporting industry over agriculture, and a push towards trade liberalization. South Korea’s self sufficiency is now one of the lowest among Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries, leaving it vulnerable to disruptions in the global food system. Here we explore this vulnerability by assessing how global trade disruptions would affect Korea’s food security. We impose historical extreme drought and flood events that would possibly affect today’s major food producing regions concurrently. Next we compute food supply deficits in South Korea that might result from these events. Our analyses provide a framework for formulating domestic food policies to enhance South Korea’s food security in the increasingly fragile global food system.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86284", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86285" } }
{"authors":"Dayne Fratanduono::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--", "title":"MR21D-03: High Temperature Equation of State of Enstatite and Forsterite: Implications for Thermal Origins and Evolution", "abstract":"The thermal history of terrestrial planets depends upon the melt boundary as it represents the largest rheological transition a material can undergo. This change in rheological behavior with solidification corresponds to a dramatic change in the thermal and chemical transport properties. Because of this dramatic change in thermal transport, recent work by Stixrude et al.[1] suggests that the silicate melt curve sets the thermal profile within super-Earths during their early thermal evolution. Here we present recent decaying shock wave experiments studying both enstatite and forsterite. The continuously measured shock pressure and temperature in these studies ranged from 8 to 1.5 Mbar and 20,000-4,000 K, respectively. We find a point on the MgSiO3 liquidus at 6800 K and 285 GPa, which is nearly a factor of two higher pressure than previously measured and provides a strong constraint on the temperature profile within super-Earths. Our shock temperature measurements on forsterite and enstatite provide much needed equation of state information to the planetary impact modeling community since the shock temperature data can be used to constrain the initial entropy state of a growing planet. This work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344. 1. Stixrude, L., Melting in super-earths. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 2014. 372(2014).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86285", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86286" } }
{"authors":"Adolfo Ribeiro::Organization Not Listed--", "title":"P41A-2042: Container-scale hydrodynamic and magnetohydrodynamic modes in liquid metal rotating convection experiments with and without an imposed magnetic field", "abstract":"Thermal convection, constrained by rapid rotation and/or large-scale magnetic fields, is observed almost everywhere in the universe: stars, galaxies, and planetary interiors. However, little is known about the essential behaviors of turbulent convection in liquid metals and even less is known about the essential dynamics of planetary cores and stellar convection zones inuenced by background rotation and imposed magnetic fields. To address this decit, we present novel results of a mixed laboratory-numerical investigation of Rayleigh-Benard convection in a cylindrical cavity subject to rotation and/or an imposed magnetic field, using the liquid metal gallium as the working fluid. A broad variety of cell-sized modes are observed experimentally and captured numerically and these modes can be either? steady, oscillatory, or precessing. This work shows that the convection-driven cell-sized modes that can develop in liquid metals are remarkably different from the canonical flows that develop in the fluids used in present day dynamo models.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86286", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86287" } }
{"authors":"Zeke Hausfather::University of California--", "title":"A41Q-08: Bounding the climate viability of natural gas as a bridge fuel to displace coal", "abstract":"Natural gas has significant potential carbon benefits over coal when used for electricity generation, but these benefits can be offset by emissions of fugitive methane or delays in the adoption of near-zero carbon technologies. We analyze the time-evolution of radiative forcing from both natural gas and coal-based electricity generation by calculating average radiative forcing over an interval of time from greenhouse gas emissions under a range of assumptions for fugitive methane leakage, electricity generation efficiency, and delays in the adoption of near-zero carbon technologies. We find that leakage rates of between 5.2% and 9.9% are required for natural gas to result in greater mean forcing than coal over the next 100 years. We show that natural gas infrastructure with modest leakage could remain in place for 1.5–2.4 times the time interval that coal generation would have persisted prior to replacement with near-zero carbon technologies before the climate benefits of replacing coal with natural gas are negated. Natural gas can serve a viable bridge away from coal-based generation if avoiding longer-term climate impacts is prioritized, fugitive methane emissions are minimized, and the large-scale transition to near-zero carbon alternatives is unlikely to happen in the near-term.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86287", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86288" } }
{"authors":"Lara Waldrop::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--John Sample::University of California Berkeley--Richard Doe::SRI International Menlo Park--John Noto::Organization Not Listed--Brian Walsh::University of California Berkeley--Farzad Kamalabadi::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Edwin Mierkiewicz::Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University--Robert Kerr::Scientific Solutions Inc--Thomas Immel::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"EP53C-1048: Exospheric and interplanetary hydrogen sensing from a translunar CubeSat platform by the Tomographic Hydrogen Emission Observatory (THEO)", "abstract":"The evaporation of neutral hydrogen (H) atmospheres into interplanetary space is a near-ubiquitous process in the universe that can be strongly perturbed by charge exchange coupling with ambient ions, influencing atmospheric evolution as well as the dissipation of plasma energy. Space-based observation of solar ultraviolet (UV) radiation scattered by H atoms is a powerful means to infer the underlying exospheric density distribution and thus unravel the competing effects of thermal and non-thermal processes on H energization and escape. Numerous past and present NASA missions have obtained measurements of terrestrial H emission at 121.6 nm (Lyman alpha) from earth-orbiting satellite platforms. However, their separate targeting of either the optically thick emission in the lower exosphere or the optically thin emission in the outer exosphere, together with their lack of independent measurement of the interplanetary emission that constitutes a significant background contamination, renders such data insufficient to advance exospheric science beyond current understanding. Here, we describe a new nano-satellite mission concept for exospheric H investigation that overcomes these historical measurement limitations. The mission, known as the Tomographic Hydrogen Emission Observatory (THEO), is designed to provide 3-D photometric measurements of terrestrial H Lyman alpha emission from a highly autonomous, three-axis-stabilized, 6U CubeSat platform along a trans-lunar trajectory that is ideal for the unambiguous estimation of H density from the exobase to the magnetopause and beyond. In particular, we will describe the feasibility of meeting operational challenges associated with satellite navigation and communication at such large distances.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86288", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86289" } }
{"authors":"Michael Starek::Texas A & M University Corpus Christi, School of Engineering and Computing Sciences--Chuyen Nguyen::Texas A & M University Corpus Christi--James Gibeaut::Harte Research Institute for Gulf of Mexico Studies at TAMU-CC--Alistair Lord::Harte Research Institute for Gulf of Mexico Studies at TAMU-CC--", "title":"EP51B-0918: Geodetic Imaging of Marsh Surface Elevation with Terrestrial Laser Scanning", "abstract":"The resilience of marshes to a rising sea is dependent on their elevation response. Given the level of precision required to measure minute changes in marsh elevation over time, survey methods have to be adapted to minimize impacts to the sediment surface. Current approaches include Surface Elevation Tables (SETs), which are used to monitor wetland surface change with respect to an in situ vertical benchmark. Although SETs have been proven as an effective technique to track subtle sedimentation rates (< 1 cm/year), they provide a single-point measurement construed to a location with limited to no information on the spatial pattern in marsh elevation response away from the measurement site. Terrestrial Laser Scanning (TLS) offers potential for high definition monitoring of marsh surface evolution. However, several challenges must be overcome in the application of the technology for geodetic imaging of marsh surfaces. These challenges include surface occlusion by dense vegetation, error propagation due to scan co-registration and referencing across time, impacts of scan angle, and filtering of non-ground points. Researchers at Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi conducted a field-survey of a marsh within the Grand Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve using TLS and RTK GPS for comparison. Grand Bay in Mississippi USA is one of the most biologically productive estuarine ecosystems in the Gulf of Mexico. The study region is covered by dense and tall saw-grass that makes it a challenging environment for bare-earth mapping. For this survey, a Riegl VZ-400 TLS (1550 nm wavelength) was utilized. The system is capable of recording multiple returns per a transmitted pulse (up to 15) and provides full-waveform output for signal post-processing to extract returns. The objectives of the study are twofold: 1) examine impacts of TLS survey design, scan angle and scan density on marsh elevation mapping; 2) assess the capabilities of multiple-echo and full-waveform TLS data to extract the bare-earth surface below the dense vegetation. This presentation will present results of the study including the developed TLS survey protocol and data processing workflow, details on waveform and multi-echo approaches for ground point detection, and a discussion on error analysis and challenges for measuring marsh surface elevation with TLS.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86289", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86291" } }
{"authors":"Kou Yang::California State University Fresno--Julie Rieth::California State University Fresno--Christopher Pluhar::California State University Fresno--", "title":"GP31A-1373: Paleomagnetism of the Lodo Formation and kinematic evolution of the Vallecitos Syncline, Coast Ranges, Central California", "abstract":"The WNW-ESE-striking Vallecitos Syncline spans part of the California Coast Ranges, and is bounded by the Calaveras-San Andreas Fault System in the west and the Great Valley in the east. A northwest bend is observed as the syncline approaches the Calaveras and San Andreas Faults to the west, possibly a result of localized clockwise tectonic rotation. We present new paleomagnetic data from four sites across the syncline in an east-west transect to test this hypothesis. We sampled shale, sandstone, and siltstone from the Lodo Formation at Tumey Hills, Griswold Hills, New Idria, and Paicines. Using standard paleomagnetic methods, we conducted low temperature and thermal demagnetization. Data from some localities were generally scattered and difficult to interpret, suffering a major secondary chemical remanent magnetization. However the eastern end of the Vallecitos Syncline exhibited interpretable results. About a third of samples showed a strong reverse polarity at Griswold Hills and New Idria Mine, indicating that magnetization of the samples pre-date tilting of the outcrop and a secondary magnetization was acquired post deformation. Characteristic remanent magnetizations also exhibit inclination shallowing at three sites, likely the effect of compaction rather than poleward transport, since the fourth in the Tumey Hills exhibits minimal shallowing. Furthermore, results from Tumey Hills, and Griswold Hills indicate no localized tectonic rotation. Based on these findings, we tentatively conclude that the eastern end of the Vallecitos Syncline experienced no rotation, within error. Results from the western end remain inconclusive.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86291", "section":"Geomagnetism and Paleomagnetism"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86292" } }
{"authors":"Colin More::University of Alberta--Mathieu Dumberry::University of Alberta--", "title":"P41A-2043: A two-dimensional approach to modelling the short timescale zonal flow in Earth's core", "abstract":"Reconstructions of flow in Earth's outer core based on surface magnetic data predict mean zonal accelerations on several timescales. Since accelerations in the core couple to the angular momentum of the mantle, their existence has been confirmed by length-of-day observations. Recent studies suggest that free modes of torsional oscillations are responsible for relatively weak signals with a 5-6 year period. The mechanisms responsible for stronger decadal signals are less well understood. To address the problem, we construct a quasi-geostrophic model of magnetoconvection, with thermally-driven flows perturbing a steady, imposed background magnetic field. This approach is justified by the Taylor-Proudman theorem, in which velocities in a rapidly rotating system vary little parallel to the rotational axis. Using only two dimensions allows a much more rapid exploration of parameter space than traditional three-dimensional approaches. Our model is capable of producing mean zonal accelerations similar to those predicted by the geomagnetic reconstructions of Earth. In particular, we see a clear separation in period between the free modes (short) and forced modes (long) of torsional oscillations. We then systematically run the model with a variety of parameters, attempting to extrapolate our results to the conditions found in Earth's core.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86292", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86293" } }
{"authors":"Kalli Herlein::University of Alberta--Uldis Silins::University of Alberta--Chris Williams::University of Alberta--Michael Wagner::Government of Alberta--Amanda Martens::University of Alberta--", "title":"H31D-1432: Evaluating the Impacts of Unexpected Forest Disturbances on Paired Catchment Calibrations of Sediment Yield and Turbidity", "abstract":"The paired catchment approach of studying the impacts of disturbance on catchment hydrology remains as perhaps the most powerful approach for direct verification of catchment scale impacts from disturbance. However, paired catchment studies are also dependent on the stability of the relationships between treated and reference catchments during calibration and evaluation periods. A long-term paired catchment study of forest harvest impacts on sediment yield and turbidity in the Rocky Mountains of southwestern Alberta, Canada has a robust 11-year pre-treatment data record. The study intends to evaluate three alternative logging practices: clear-cutting, strip-shelterwood, and partial cutting. 3 sub-catchments in Star Creek (1035 ha) underwent harvest treatments while North York Creek (865 Ha) serves as the reference. The objective of this particular study was to explore the potential effects of unplanned and unanticipated watershed changes in two watersheds during an 11-year calibration. Sediment yield (kg ha-1 d-1) and turbidity (NTU) were monitored throughout the calibration period (2004-2014) prior to the 2015 harvest in Star Creek. Two unanticipated disturbances including backcountry trail rehabilitation in North York (2010) followed by a >100 year storm event in both watersheds in June 2013 may have affected the sediment yield and turbidity calibration relationships. Analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was used to evaluate the effects of this trail rehabilitation and flooding by comparing the calibration relationships before and after these disturbances. Despite qualitative field observations of periodically affected sediment regimes, no impact on pre- or post- calibration relationships was observed. Backcountry trail rehabilitation in North York (p=0.904 and 0.416 for sediment yield and turbidity, respectively) or flooding in both watersheds (p=0.364 and 0.204 for sediment yield and turbidity, respectively) did not produce significant changes to the calibrations. Although calibrated watershed studies bear meaningful risks from unplanned disturbances, in contrast to both scaling up process-based research and modelling studies, paired catchment studies remain as the demonstrable benchmark for powerful inference on the impacts of abrupt landscape change on watershed functions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86293", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86294" } }
{"authors":"Daniel MacMillan::NVI, Inc.--", "title":"G31A-1094: Nontidal Loading Applied in VLBI Geodetic Analysis", "abstract":"<span` >We investigate the application of nontidal atmosphere pressure, hydrology, and ocean loading series in the analysis of VLBI data. The annual amplitude of VLBI scale variation is reduced to less than 0.1 ppb, a result of the annual components of the vertical loading series. VLBI site vertical scatter and baseline length scatter is reduced when these loading models are applied. We operate nontidal loading services for hydrology loading (GLDAS model), atmospheric pressure loading (NCEP), and nontidal ocean loading (JPL ECCO model). As an alternative validation, we compare these loading series with corresponding series generated by other analysis centers.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86294", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86295" } }
{"authors":"Cao Yuncheng::SCSIO South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Acaademy of Sciences--Duofu Chen::GIG Guangzhou Institute of Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences--", "title":"OS23B-1993: The influence of sedimentation rate variation on the occurrence of methane hydrate crystallized from dissolved methane in marine gas hydrate system", "abstract":"Methane is commonly delivered to the gas hydrate stability zone by advection of methane-bearing fluids, diffusion of dissolved methane, and in-situ biogenic methane production (Davie and Buffett, 2003), except at cold vent sites. Burial of pore water and sediment compaction can induce the fluid flux change (Bhatnagar et al., 2007). Sedimentation supply the organic material for methane production. In addition, Gas hydrate can move to below gas hydrate stability zone and decompose via sedimentation. Therefore, sedimentation significantly affect the gas hydrate accumulation. ODP site 997 located at the Blake Ridge. The sedimentation rate is estimated to 48 m/Ma, 245m/Ma, 17.2 m/Ma and 281m/Ma for 0-2.5Ma, 2.5-3.75Ma, 3.75-4.4Ma, and 4.4-5.9Ma, respectively, according to the age-depth profile of biostratigraphic marker of nonnofossils(Paull et al., 1996).  We constructed a gas hydrate formation model and apply to ODP sites 997 to evaluate the influence of variation of sedimentation rate on gas hydrate accumulation. Our results show that the gas hydrate format rate varied from 0.013mol/m2-a to 0.017mol/m2-a and the gas hydrate burial to below gas hydrate stability zone varied from 0.001mol/m2-a to 0.018mol/m2-a during recently 5Ma. The gas hydrate formation rate by pore water advection and dissolved methane diffusion would be lower, and the top occurrence of gas hydrate would be shallower, when the sedimentation rate is higher. With higher sedimentation rate, the amount of gas hydrate burial to below stability zone would be larger. The relative high sedimentation rate before 2.5 Ma at ODP site 997 produced the gas hydrate saturation much lower than present value, and over 60% of present gas hydrates are formed during recent 2.5Ma. <span` >Reference: Bhatnagar,G., Chapman, W. G.,Dickens, G. R., et al. Generalization of gas hydrate distribution and saturation in marine sediments by scaling of thermodynamic and transport processes. American Journal of Science, 2007, 307, 861–900. Davie, M.K., Buffett, B. A. Sources of methane for marine gas hydrate: inferences from a comparison of observations and numerical models, Earth and Planet Science Letters, 2003, 206, 51–63. Paull, C. K., Matsumoto, R., Wallace, P. J. et al. Proceedings of the Ocean Drilling Program, Initial Reports, Volume 164, 1996.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86295", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86296" } }
{"authors":"Ryan Sibert::University of Georgia--Samantha Joye::University of Georgia--Kimberley Hunter::University of Georgia--", "title":"B11I-0560: Short-chain alkane cycling in deep Gulf of Mexico cold-seep sediments", "abstract":"Mixtures of light hydrocarbon gases are common in deep Gulf of Mexico cold-seep sediments, and are typically dissolved in pore fluids, adsorbed to sediment particles, trapped in methane ice, or as free gas. The dominant component in these natural gas mixtures is usually methane (>80% C1), but ethane (C2) and propane (C3) are nearly always present in trace amounts (<1% total). The processes that control the concentration and isotopic signature of these gases in sediments are well explained for methane, but the controls for C2/C3 cycling are still a relative mystery. Methane production proceeds in deep anoxic sediments by either 1) thermocatalytic cracking of fossil organic matter, or 2) as a direct product of microbial metabolism, i.e. methanogenesis. In surface sediments, it appears that both microbial consumption and chemical deposition of methane (i.e. as methane clathrate) ensures that >95% of the methane produced at depth never reaches the water column. Production of C1 and C2 in deep-sea sediments has been historically attributed only to thermocatalytic processes, though limited data suggests production of C2/C3 compounds through the activity of archaea at depth. Furthermore, carbon isotopic data on ethane and propane from deep cores of Gulf of Mexico sediments suggest alkanogenesis at >3 m depth in the sediment column and alkane oxidation in uppermost oxidant-rich sediments. Additional studies have also isolated microorganisms capable of oxidizing ethane and propane in the laboratory, but field studies of microbial-driven dynamics of C2/C3 gases in cold-seep sediments are rare. Here, we present the results of a series of incubation experiments using sediment slurries culled from surface sediments from one of the most prolific natural oil and gas seeps in the Gulf of Mexico. Rates of alkane oxidation were measured under a variety of conditions to assess the surface-driven microbial controls on C2/C3 cycling in cold-seep environments. Such microbial processes are important in terms of the possible ‘oxidative overprinting’ of alkane isotopic signatures produced at depth, possibly obscuring typical microbial isotopic signals.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86296", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86297" } }
{"authors":"Gavin Manson::Geological Survey of Canada Atlantic--", "title":"EP23A-0946: Coastal mapping and modelling of Tuktoyaktuk Harbour, Western Arctic, Canada", "abstract":"Climate models suggest that sea ice in the Arctic is expected to decrease and that the frequency of storms bringing high waves and storm surges is expected to increase. Reduced sea ice, higher waves, and higher storm surge water levels have implications for coastal infrastructure, nearshore sediment transport, and rates of coastal change. Tuktoyaktuk is an important shipping terminal servicing the petroleum industry and Inuvialuit communities in the western Canadian Arctic. The hydrodynamic model Delft3D is used to model sediment transport in Tuktoyaktuk Harbour and the approaches. For nearshore applications, Delft3D works best with a seamless coastal digital elevation model (DEM). A DEM was constructed from a variety of sources. Terrestrial LiDAR (Light Detection And Ranging) uses an infrared laser to construct a detailed elevation model of the terrestrial coastal zone. Multibeam bathymetry uses arrays of acoustic signals to collect detailed of the subaqueous coastal zone. Bathymetry data, and charts from the Canadian Hydrographic Service supplement the offshore bathymetry. The shoreline is derived from CanCoast, a nationally consistent geospatial database of Canada's marine coasts. The Coastal Information System (CIS) supplements CanCoast and describes coastal geomorphology in local areas. With these data, Delft3D delivered wave, current, and sediment transport data in a common reference frame. When compared to measurements, the model successfully simulates waves and currents. Output from Delft3D was mapped into a Geographic Information System, and combined with other data to help an Arctic community and industries adapt to potential climate-related hazards .", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86297", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86298" } }
{"authors":"Kamran Panaghi::Nihon University Tarbiat Modares University--Takato Takemura::Nihon University--Aliakbar Golshani::Tarbiat Modares University--Manabu Takahashi::AIST--Minoru Sato::University of Tsukuba--", "title":"MR41B-2630: Assessment of rock mechanical behavior considering stress dependent stiffness of the cracked domain within crack tensor-based approach", "abstract":"The analyses dedicated to media with prevalent discontinuities such as rocks has mostly been limited to inevitable simplifications to make engineering judgments on the material behavior feasible. Such assumptions, though favorable in numerical simulations, usually lead to overestimations in aseismic design of earthen structures. One of the forbidding tasks in modeling rock behavior is taking the stress dependency of stiffness into consideration which implies more complicated formulations. Although the theoretical relationship for such computations has already been proposed by scholars, there still remains some gaps in the real-world application of the aforementioned. The crack tensor-based formulation in describing stress-strain behavior of cracked rock is a case in point in which the fourth-rank crack tensor effect is usually ignored due to adopting equal normal and shear stiffnesses for the medium. Once the stiffnesses were distinguished in different values, the accompanying condition imposed by the formulation requires computation of fourth rank tensor which has not been obtained in a practical manner so far. In the present study, we aim to acquire the values via experimental measurements and implement the results to further improve the accuracy of the formulation used in characterizing mechanical behavior of rock samples.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86298", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86299" } }
{"authors":"Tatsuya Hamaki::Okayama University--", "title":"A51G-0151: Analysis on seasonal retreat of Siberian High(with attention to characteristics of the Siberian High between late winter and midwinter)", "abstract":"In midwinter the Siberian high predominates with its center around 45~55N/80~120E to bring the intense cold air outbreak in East Asia. However, seasonal retreat processes of the Siberian High from winter to spring, including the day-to-day variations, have not been systematically understood yet other than that it is weakened rapidly in April. According to our previous reports (EGU2015-3172, etc.) pointed out by a case study for 1984 (cold winter around Japan Islands), although the strong Siberian High still appeared frequently in early spring (e.g., 16Feb.~15Mar.) its 3-dimensional structure was rather different from that in midwinter (e.g., 1Jan.~15Feb.). The latitude of the strong surface high center which appeared in the eastern area (100~120E) in the early spring, with wider meridional range (45~65N), corresponded to the southern edge of the extremely low temperature area (Siberian air mass), differently from that in midwinter. In the present study, we will further perform the analyses on the above phenomena, with attention also to the persistency of the high, behavior of surface lows, and soon, by using mainly the daily weather maps provided by Japan Meteorological Agency and the NCEP/NCAR reanalysis data for 1975~1984. The maximum value of the surface high does not decrease so much in early spring in the Siberian area, but the appearance frequency of such highs decreased then. Thus, the seasonal decrease in the areal mean SLP there seems to be reflected by the slight weakening of the Siberian High itself with lower persistency, not by the increase in the cyclone activity around Siberia in early spring (the cyclone activity there did not increase so much until April). It is also noted that daily Siberian High with its extremely high pressure (e.g., more than 1040hPa) showed much less persistency in early spring than in midwinter. In this study, we will present of the overall features of the seasonal retreat processes of the Siberian High, also with combination of our previous results.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86299", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86300" } }
{"authors":"Hamidreza Sadeghi::Kensetsu Gijutsu Center LTD.--", "title":"NH13D-1960: Environmentally Friendly Solution to Ground Hazards in Design of Bridges in Earthquake Prone Areas Using Timber Piles", "abstract":"Bridges are major elements of infrastructure in all societies. Their safety and continued serviceability guaranties the transportation and emergency access in urban and rural areas. However, these important structures are subject to earthquake induced damages in structure and foundations. The basic approach to the proper support of foundations are a) distribution of imposed loads to foundation in a way they can resist those loads without excessive settlement and failure; b) modification of foundation ground with various available methods; and c) combination of “a” and “b”. The engineers has to face the task of designing the foundations meeting all safely and serviceability criteria but sometimes when there are numerous environmental and financial constrains, the use of some traditional methods become inevitable. This paper explains the application of timber piles to improve ground resistance to liquefaction and to secure the abutments of short to medium length bridges in an earthquake/liquefaction prone area in Bohol Island, Philippines. The limitations of using the common ground improvement methods (i.e., injection, dynamic compaction) because of either environmental or financial concerns along with the abundance of timber in the area made the engineers to use a network of timber piles behind the backwalls of the bridge abutments. The suggested timber pile network is simulated by numerical methods and its safety is examined. The results show that the compaction caused by driving of the piles and bearing capacity provided by timbers reduce the settlement and lateral movements due to service and earthquake induced loads.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86300", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86301" } }
{"authors":"Tobias Koffman::Lamont -Doherty Earth Observatory--Joerg Schaefer::Columbia University of New York--Anne Hormes::The University Centre in Svalbard--Jason Briner::University at Buffalo--Endre Gjermundsen::The University Centre in Svalbard--Nicolas Young::Lamont -Doherty Earth Observatory--Michael Kaplan::Lamont-DohertyEarthObservatory--Daniel Nothaft::Columbia University of New York--", "title":"PP33A-2290: Ice Sheet Evolution and Deglaciation Chronology of Southwestern Spitsbergen Illuminated by Three-Nuclide Surface-Exposure Dating (26Al, 10Be, and 14C).", "abstract":"Glacial-interglacial ice-sheet mass changes represent arguably the greatest observable changes in Arctic hydroclimate, yet the rate and timing of even the relatively recent the post-Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) deglaciation remain controversial, casting uncertainty onto predictions of future ice-sheet contributions to sea-level rise. Here we present terrestrial cosmogenic nuclide (TCN) surface-exposure dates that constrain the long-term thickness, erosivity, and late-glacial recession chronology of parts of the western margin of the Svalbard-Barents-Sea Ice Sheet. Our sampling sites are coastal hills that generally lack glacially transported erratic clasts but commonly feature ice-molded bedrock. Polar ice sheets often fail to remove inventories of long-lived radionuclides built up during prior interglacials, and indeed our 26Al and 10Be (half-life = 0.7 and 1.4 Ma) data show elevation-dependant concentration differences that are consistent with variable ice cover that was commonly more extensive than at present, but less than during the LGM. All sites that we sampled in the area were ice-covered at the LGM. By measuring 14C (half-life = 5730 years) in the same samples we can detect the rate of post-LGM ice-sheet thinning. Preliminary data are consistent with marine sediment core dates that show rapid ice-sheet retreat at around 15,000 years ago.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86301", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86302" } }
{"authors":"Andrew Prentice::Monash University University of Southern Queensland--", "title":"P51A-2035: Formation of Pluto’s moons: the fission hypothesis revisited", "abstract":"I re-examine the fission hypothesis for the formation of Pluto’s moons within the framework of a gas ring model for the origin of the solar system (Prentice 1978 Moon Planets 19 341; 2015 LPSC, abs. 2664). It is supposed that the planetary system condensed from a concentric family of orbiting gas rings. These were cast off by the proto-solar cloud (PSC) as a means for disposing of excess spin angular momentum during gravitational contraction. If contraction is homologous, the mean orbital radii R(n) (n = 0,1,2,3,..) of the rings form a nearly geometric sequence. The temperatures T(n) of the rings scale roughly as T(n) = A/R(n) and the gas pressures p(n) on the gas ring mean orbits scale as p(n) = B/R(n)^4. The constants A & B are chosen so that (1) the geometric mean of the ratio R(n+1)/R(n) of successive gas ring radii from Jupiter to Mercury matches the observed mean ratio of planetary distances and (2) that the metal mass fraction at Mercury’s orbit, namely 0.70, yields a planet whose mean density equals the observed value (Prentice 2008, LPSC abs. 1945.pdf). I assume that proto-Pluto (PPO) condensed within the n = 0 gas ring shed by the PSC at the orbit of Quaoar (43.2 AU). Here T(0) = 26.3 K and p(0) = 1.3 x 10^(-9) bar. The condensate consists of anhydrous rock (mass fraction 0.5255), graphite (0.0163), water ice (0.1858), dry ice (0.2211), and methane ice (0.0513). The RTP rock density is 3.662 g/cc. I assume that melting of the ices in the PPO took place through the decay of short-lived radioactive nuclides, causing internal segregation of rock & graphite. If rotational fission did occur and Pluto’s moons formed from ejected liquid water and CO2, we get a Charon mean density of 1.24 g/cc. This is much lower than the observed value. Perhaps some of the rock and graphite became entrained in the fissioned liquid, so yielding a dense core for Charon of mass fraction ~0.4? In any event, the surfaces of all of the moons should have initially been football-shaped, very smooth and consist solely of water ice. As there is no outward migration of the major planets in the gas ring model, the risk of impact bombardment is minimal. Most likely, subsequent tidal action between Pluto and Charon produced the chasms that girdle the equator of Charon (Barr & Collins 2015). I predict that New Horizons will detect dry ice in those parts of Hydra that have been gouged by impacts.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86302", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86303" } }
{"authors":"Glenn Juday::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Ryan Jess::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Claire Alix::Université Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne--David Verbyla::University of Alaska Fairbanks--", "title":"B53C-0576: Examining mechanisms in the final stages of the elimination of boreal tree species on vulnerable sites in boreal Alaska", "abstract":"The boreal forest of Alaska and western Canada exist in a complex mosaic of environments determined by elevation, aspect of exposure, and longitudinal and latitudinal gradients of change from warm, dry continental to maritime-influenced conditions. This forest region is largely made up of trees with two growth responses to temperature increases. Trees that decrease in growth are termed negative responders, and occupy warm, dry sites at low elevations. Trees that increase in radial growth are termed positive responders, and are largely in western Alaska, and at high elevation of the Brooks and Alaska Ranges. Since the Pacific climate regime shift of the 1970s, mature trees at low elevation sites have experienced increasing climate stress in several quasi-decadal cycles of intensifying drought stress. NDVI trends and tree ring records demonstrating radial growth decline are coherent. Phenological monitoring of spruce height growth also indicates that depletion of spring soil moisture is a critical process driven by the interaction of early warm season temperatures and precipitation. Novel biotic disturbance agents including spruce budworm, outbreaks of which are triggered by warm temperature anomalies related to its biology, and aspen leaf miner are depressing realized growth below climatically predicted levels, suggesting a pathway by which tree death is likely to occur before absolute temperature limits. As a result, insect outbreaks are degrading the otherwise strong long-term climate signal in Alaska boreal trees. However, young tree (> 40 yrs.) regeneration generally does not yet display the symptoms of acute high temperature stress. Overall, on these vulnerable sites, if temperature increases similar to the past 40 years continue, long term survival prospects are questionable because the climate conditions would be outside the limits that have historically defined the species ranges of aspen, Alaska birch, and black and white spruce.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86303", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86304" } }
{"authors":"George Hilley::Stanford University--", "title":"ED33E-08: Field-Based Experiential Learning Using Mobile Devices", "abstract":"Technologies such as GPS and cellular triangulation allow location-specific content to be delivered by mobile devices, but no mechanism currently exists to associate content shared between locations in a way that guarantees the delivery of coherent and non-redundant information at every location. Thus, experiential learning via mobile devices must currently take place along a predefined path, as in the case of a self-guided tour. I developed a mobile-device-based system that allows a person to move through a space along a path of their choosing, while receiving information in a way that guarantees delivery of appropriate background and location-specific information without producing redundancy of content between locations. This is accomplished by coupling content to knowledge-concept tags that are noted as fulfilled when users take prescribed actions. Similarly, the presentation of the content is related to the fulfillment of these knowledge-concept tags through logic statements that control the presentation. Content delivery is triggered by mobile-device geolocation including GPS/cellular navigation, and sensing of low-power Bluetooth proximity beacons. Together, these features implement a process that guarantees a coherent, non-redundant educational experience throughout a space, regardless of a learner's chosen path. The app that runs on the mobile device works in tandem with a server-side database and file-serving system that can be configured through a web-based GUI, and so content creators can easily populate and configure content with the system. Once the database has been updated, the new content is immediately available to the mobile devices when they arrive at the location at which content is required. Such a system serves as a platform for the development of field-based geoscience educational experiences, in which students can organically learn about core concepts at particular locations while individually exploring a space.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86304", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86305" } }
{"authors":"John Wilson::New Mexico Tech--Marty Frisbee::Purdue University--Jesus Gomez-Velez::US Geological Survey--Fred Phillips::New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology--", "title":"H21F-1433: Why Does the Convolution Integral Method Provide Systematically Biased Estimates of Watershed Residence Times?", "abstract":"Every observational method for estimating hydrologic residence time comes with built-in biases. For example, each tracer-based method has a range of times that it can grasp. Because of mixing along flow paths, especially at convergence zones like streams, springs and wells, water samples contain a distribution of residence times. An observation method interrogates that portion of the distribution for which it is suited, with different methods interrogating different portions of the distribution and providing different mean residence-time estimates. For this reason, it would be best to employ a suite of observational methods that span the entire distribution. In practice, only one or at best a few methods are applied and the distribution is not thoroughly characterized resulting is biased estimates of the mean. The Convolution Integral Method (CIM) is commonly employed by itself to estimate watershed residence times from records of stable isotopes collected in precipitation and streamflow. Published studies using CIM suggest that watershed residence times are short, on the order of days to years. However, CIM appears to be biased because it uses relatively short-duration records of recent measurements, such that published CIM residence time estimates are similar to the time period of the records used in the analysis. If CIM truncates the older portion of the residence time distribution it underestimates the role of slower processes like deeper-groundwater contributions. The explanation of bias may be broader. We find that a longer time series of input and output does not necessarily improve the method from a mathematical perspective. In any event, when using CIM with stable isotopes there are processes that intrinsically obscure observation of the older portions of the distribution. It is not clear that additional research on this application of stable isotopes can necessarily improve residence time estimates.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86305", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86306" } }
{"authors":"Daniel Mandl::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Karl Huemmrich::University of Maryland Baltimore County--Vuong Ly::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Matthew Handy::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Lawrence Ong::Science Systems and Applications, Inc.--Gary Crum::NASA GSFC--", "title":"IN41B-1706: Hyperspectral Cubesat Constellation for Rapid Natural Hazard Response", "abstract":"With the advent of high performance space networks that provide total coverage for Cubesats, the paradigm for low cost, high temporal coverage with hyperspectral instruments becomes more feasible. The combination of ground cloud computing resources, high performance with low power consumption onboard processing, total coverage for the cubesats and social media provide an opprotunity for an architecture that provides cost-effective hyperspectral data products for natural hazard response and decision support. This paper provides a series of pathfinder efforts to create a scalable Intelligent Payload Module(IPM) that has flown on a variety of airborne vehicles including Cessna airplanes, Citation jets and a helicopter and will fly on an Unmanned Aerial System (UAS) hexacopter to monitor natural phenomena. The IPM's developed thus far were developed on platforms that emulate a satellite environment which use real satellite flight software, real ground software. In addition, science processing software has been developed that perform hyperspectral processing onboard using various parallel processing techniques to enable creation of onboard hyperspectral data products while consuming low power. A cubesat design was developed that is low cost and that is scalable to larger consteallations and thus can provide daily hyperspectral observations for any spot on earth. The design was based on the existing IPM prototypes and metrics that were developed over the past few years and a shrunken IPM that can perform up to 800 Mbps throughput. Thus this constellation of hyperspectral cubesats could be constantly monitoring spectra with spectral angle mappers after Level 0, Level 1 Radiometric Correction, Atmospheric Correction processing. This provides the opportunity daily monitoring of any spot on earth on a daily basis at 30 meter resolution which is not available today.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86306", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86308" } }
{"authors":"Thomas Mitchell::University College London--Anisah Anuar::University College London--Philip Meredith::University College London--Pamela Perez-Flores::Pontifical Catholic University of Chile--", "title":"MR33A-2648: The influence of initial damage on microcrack healing at hydrothermal conditions", "abstract":"Off-fault coseismic fracture damage at depth can be inferred from reductions of crustal seismic velocity following large earthquakes. A growing body of geophysical evidence exists for ‘healing’ processes occurring in the bulk following such earthquakes, inferred from time-dependent increases in seismic velocity lasting from days to years. Surprisingly, little is known about the controls on co-seismic microfracture damage healing rates. Here, we present experimental and microstructural observations on the rates of microfracture healing in terms of post-seismic recovery of seismic velocity, porosity and permeability, as a function of varying initial damage. Preliminary results indicate that highly damaged samples show up to three orders of magnitude reduction in permeability over several days at temperatures and pressures commensurate with just 4km depth, combined with significant decreases in porosity and increases in seismic velocity.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86308", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86309" } }
{"authors":"Skip Van Bloem::Belle W. Baruch Institute of Coastal Ecology and Forest Science--Stefanie Whitmire::Belle W. Baruch Institute of Coastal Ecology and Forest Science--Jarrod Thaxton::University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez--", "title":"B21L-09: Creation of Alternate Stable States in Tropical Dry Forests as a Consequence of Human Disturbance", "abstract":"Anthropogenic disturbances in Caribbean subtropical dry forests of the Caribbean lead to either novel species assemblages in post-disturbance forest, or stable degraded grassland states. Among these disturbances are fire and clearing. Short-term responses to both disturbances include sharp increases in nutrient fluxes, shifts in soil moisture availability, and the spread of invasive grass species if seed sources are nearby. In Guánica Forest, Puerto Rico, our studies in sites that were frequently burned and a chronosequence of once-burned sites beginning 30 years ago showed that fire is associated with invasion by exotic grass species and that once invaded, grass dominated sites do not revert to forest. After 30 years, single burn sites were still ≥65% lower in basal area and species richness than native forest. Frequently burned sites had 60-75% lower soil N, 50-65% lower S, and 56-68% lower C, as well as elevated Fe and pH. A single burn in a previously unburned forest elevated NO3 flux ~6-fold for at least the next year. Once dominated by grass, tree seed rain is extremely low (7 seeds/m2/y). Low dispersal rates combined with low germination rates makes forest regeneration unlikely. In contrast, sites that cleared or plowed without grass invasion regain structural characteristics of native forests in approximately 40 years. However, these sites are typically dominated by Leucaena leucocephala, a naturalized tree introduced to the island in the 1700s. The proportion of native-species saplings in the understory of Leucaena-dominated forests increased by 0.85%/yr in stands >35 years old until reaching ~95% in 76 yr old stands, suggesting that Leucaena facilitated the reestablishment of native species. We conclude that when anthropogenic disturbance creates grass-dominated sites, these areas will remain stable degraded states. Leucaena can serve as an alternate pathway to forest restoration, facilitating the return of forest cover with a novel combination of species.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86309", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86310" } }
{"authors":"Zhenhua Li::University of Saskatchewan--Alan Manson::University of Saskatchewan--Chris Meek::University of Saskatchewan--", "title":"A51H-0167: Persistent Cold Weather Events in the Central-Eastern North America", "abstract":"The circulation patterns for persistent cold weather events for eastern US and Canada ( 95W-65W, 32N-52N) are investigated using NCEP Reanalysis(1948-2014) and ERA-Interim(1979-2014). The criteria for the persistent cold events are: 1.The three day averaged temperature anomalies for the regional average over eastern US and Canada are below 10th percentile; 2. Such extreme ` cold spells`  last at least 10 days. The circulation patterns associated with these cold events are examined closedly to find common factors which are preludes of these events. The circulation anomaly patterns of these events are categorized based on the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) indices, Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO), Arctic Oscillation (AO) indices, and other climatic patterns from PCA(EOFs). Atmospheric circulation patterns and factors in lower boundary favor these cold events are identified through the composites of the cold events. The differences of stationary wave pattern and wave sources before and during these cold events in different background atmospheric circulations and boundary conditions are investigated.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86310", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86311" } }
{"authors":"Nate Lindsey::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory University of California Berkeley--Anna Wagner::Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory Alaska--Shan Dou::University of California Berkeley--Eileen Martin::Stanford University--Jonathan Ajo Franklin::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Thomas Daley::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Michelle Robertson::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Barry Freifeld::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Kevin Bjella::U.S. Army Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory Alaska--Craig Ulrich::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--", "title":"S41B-2718: Repeatability of Surface Wave Velocity Estimates from Distributed Acoustic Sensing (DAS) Data", "abstract":"The repeatability of surface wave velocity estimates from local ambient noise hinges on the stability of the crosscorrelation function for the receiver pair in the presence of a variable noise field, assuming near-surface soil properties are invariant over the duration of the surveys. Distributed acoustic sensing (DAS) data recorded on a linear trenched fiber optic cable sensor can accurately sample surface waves in a near continuous fashion (>1 kHz) with high spatial resolution (>1 receiver/m) and long range (10’s of km). DAS recordings of ambient noise represent a unique means to explore the practical reliability of field-scale seismic property estimation from seismic interferometry. We test this hypothesis using continuous DAS field recordings from a shallow trench experiment near a busy road with diurnally-variable traffic patterns. Continuous records are processed using a modified ambient noise workflow consisting of receiver pair crosscorrelation, signal stacking, dispersion analysis, and a Monte Carlo search procedure to determine a best-fitting Vs model. The same processing flow is also applied to campaign data acquired with geophones to determine the repeatability benefit of trenched DAS deployment.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86311", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86312" } }
{"authors":"Cooper Elsworth::Stanford Earth Sciences--Jenny Suckale::Stanford University--", "title":"C54B-03: Sequential Stagnation of Kamb Ice Stream Induced by Changes in Subglacial Hydrology", "abstract":"Ice stream dynamics remain an important unknown in quantifying the future mass flux from ice sheets. On the Siple Coast of West Antartica, ice streams lack distinct topographic control and have exhibited large-scale rearrangement on decadal to centennial time scales. The shutdown of Kamb Ice Stream and slowing of Whillans Ice Stream provide an opportunity to study the mechanisms governing ice-stream stability and assess their potential response to climatic perturbations. Here, we aim to evaluate possible mechanisms that lead to continuous and discontinuous margin migration within the context of the Siple Coast. The variable behavior of Siple Coast ice streams depends strongly on the coupling between till rheology, ice rheology, and shear margin position. We capture these feedbacks through a time-dependent 2D thermo-mechanical model that resolves the self-consistent margin position. We assume a plastic till, where yield strength is strongly dependent on pore pressure. This coupling results in spatially variable basal strength that evolves in time based on the presence and development of subglacial water systems. Furthermore, we link melt production in the ice column to pore pressure in the till, to determine how englacial melt production may affect margin position and stability. The model can therefore provide constraints on basal strength distributions that facilitate continuous and discontinuous margin migration. This study focuses on the Duckfoot region of Kamb Ice Stream, a section of ice near the grounding line that is thought to have experienced discontinuous margin migration. Retzlaff and Bentley [1993] suggest that a film to channel collapse may have initiated stagnation, while other studies suggest water piracy, variations in driving stress, and grounding of the ice shelf. We present model results for different migration and stagnation hypotheses and compare our results to radar data from Catania et al. [2006]. We demonstrate that changes in the efficiency of the subglacial drainage system are likely the explanation for sequential stagnation of Duckfoot and eventual shutdown of Kamb Ice Stream. We also discuss implications to the slowing of Whillans Ice Stream and investigate surface expressions of channelized drainage development.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86312", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86313" } }
{"authors":"David Hathaway::NASA Ames Research Center--Lisa Upton::Exelis Visual Information Solutions, Inc--", "title":"SH23A-2434: Solar Cycle Prediction with the Advective Flux Transport (AFT) Code", "abstract":"Recent observations and analyses strongly indicate that the strength of the sun’s polar fields at the end of a cycle predicts the strength of the next solar cycle. The surface magnetic flux transport that builds up these polar fields is now well observed and is realistically modeled with the Advective Flux Transport (AFT) code. Given the emergence of magnetic flux in active regions, and using the observed near surface flows, the AFT code can reproduce, in detail, the observed magnetic features - including both the polar fields and the large unipolar regions – years later. The AFT code can thus be used to predict the strength of the polar fields years before the end of a cycle and thereby provide an earlier prediction for the strength of the next cycle. We examine the limits of these predictions by reconstructing the sun’s magnetic field in previous cycles. We find that both the surface flows and the active region sources change systematically over the course of a cycle and with the strength of a cycle. However, stochastic variations in both the flows and the active region sources ultimately limit predictions of the solar cycle.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86313", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86314" } }
{"authors":"Carlos Silva::Brown University--Katherine Cushman::Brown University--Sandra Wiseman::Brown University--Xi Yang::Brown University--James Kellner::Brown University--", "title":"B43H-0658: Simultaneous Measurement of Leaf and Whole-Canopy Solar-Induced Fluorescence using Very-High-Resolution Imaging Spectroscopy", "abstract":"Incoming solar radiation absorbed by chlorophyll molecules drives the light-dependent reactions of photosynthesis. However, a portion of the radiation absorbed by chlorophyll is dissipated as heat or emitted as fluorescence. Therefore, solar-induced fluorescence (SIF) is mechanistically linked with the instantaneous rate of photosynthesis at the molecular level. Recent studies have shown SIF is correlated with gross primary production (GPP) at the level of individual leaves as well as plant canopies, indicating SIF measurements via satellite and airborne remote sensing may improve estimates of terrestrial GPP. However, accurate inference of canopy GPP from SIF measurements requires resolving several challenges. One challenge is the contribution from leaves in the canopy interior to total canopy SIF. Remotely observed canopy SIF is dominated by the upper canopy, because photons fluoresced within the canopy interior are re-absorbed by other leaves. However, the contribution of interior canopy leaves to total canopy GPP is non-negligible. Models indicate that leaf-level GPP plateaus with increasing SIF, whereas the relationship between whole-canopy GPP and SIF does not saturate. Here we use hourly SIF measurements from a VNIR imaging spectrometer mounted on a canopy tower to quantify within-canopy variation in SIF. We examine leaf-level SIF at < 1 cm spatial resolution in directly illuminated leaves versus leaves in the canopy interior at different canopy heights over the course of several days. The within-canopy variation in SIF demonstrates how the leaf-level contribution to total canopy photosynthesis likely varies throughout the canopy volume. Our results can help inform SIF-derived GPP estimates, which are crucial to quantifying the response of terrestrial ecosystems to climate change.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86314", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86315" } }
{"authors":"Qunying Huang::George Mason University--Chris Scheele::University of Wisconsin, Madison--Chaowei Phil Yang::George Mason University Fairfax--Fei Hu::George Mason University Fairfax--Manzhu Yu::George Mason University Fairfax--Kai Liu::George Mason University Fairfax--", "title":"IN43B-1726: Rasdaman for Big Spatial Raster Data", "abstract":"Spatial raster data have grown exponentially over the past decade. Recent advancements on data acquisition technology, such as remote sensing, have allowed us to collect massive observation data of various spatial resolution and domain coverage. The volume, velocity, and variety of such spatial data, along with the computational intensive nature of spatial queries, pose grand challenge to the storage technologies for effective big data management. While high performance computing platforms (e.g., cloud computing) can be used to solve the computing-intensive issues in big data analysis, data has to be managed in a way that is suitable for distributed parallel processing. Recently, rasdaman (raster data manager) has emerged as a scalable and cost-effective database solution to store and retrieve massive multi-dimensional arrays, such as sensor, image, and statistics data. Within this paper, the pros and cons of using rasdaman to manage and query spatial raster data will be examined and compared with other common approaches, including file-based systems, relational databases (e.g., PostgreSQL/PostGIS), and NoSQL databases (e.g., MongoDB and Hive). Earth Observing System (EOS) data collected from NASA’s Atmospheric Scientific Data Center (ASDC) will be used and stored in these selected database systems, and a set of spatial and non-spatial queries will be designed to benchmark their performance on retrieving large-scale, multi-dimensional arrays of EOS data. Lessons learnt from using rasdaman will be discussed as well.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86315", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86316" } }
{"authors":"Paige Northway::University of Washington Seattle Campus--", "title":"EP53C-1049: Pulsed Plasma Propulsion - Making CubeSat Missions Beyond Low Earth Orbit Possible", "abstract":"As CubeSat missions become more and more popular means of scientific exploration of space, the current direction of interest is to utilize them in areas beyond low earth orbit. The University of Washington CubeSat program focuses on examining possible mission scenarios in addition to technology development and integration. Specifically, we are developing an inert CubeSat propulsion system in the form of a pulsed plasma thruster (PPT) capable of orbit maneuvers. Such a system would allow for missions at the Earth beyond LEO, extended missions at the Moon, and even missions at Europa, when assisted to the Jovian system. We will discuss how starting with a CubeSat design using PPTs for orbital maneuvers, other developing compact technology can be adapted to create a full suite of systems that would meet the requirements for a mission traveling outside low earth orbit.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86316", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86317" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"IN13C-1856: Key Lessons in Building “Data Commons”: The Open Science Data Cloud Ecosystem", "abstract":"Cloud computing technology has created a shift around data and data analysis by allowing researchers to push computation to data as opposed to having to pull data to an individual researcher’s computer. Subsequently, cloud-based resources can provide unique opportunities to capture computing environments used both to access raw data in its original form and also to create analysis products which may be the source of data for tables and figures presented in research publications. Since 2008, the Open Cloud Consortium (OCC) has operated the Open Science Data Cloud (OSDC), which provides scientific researchers with computational resources for storing, sharing, and analyzing large (terabyte and petabyte-scale) scientific datasets. OSDC has provided compute and storage services to over 750 researchers in a wide variety of data intensive disciplines. Recently, internal users have logged about 2 million core hours each month. The OSDC also serves the research community by colocating these resources with access to nearly a petabyte of public scientific datasets in a variety of fields also accessible for download externally by the public. In our experience operating these resources, researchers are well served by “data commons,” meaning cyberinfrastructure that colocates data archives, computing, and storage infrastructure and supports essential tools and services for working with scientific data. In addition to the OSDC public data commons, the OCC operates a data commons in collaboration with NASA and is developing a data commons for NOAA datasets.  As cloud-based infrastructures for distributing and computing over data become more pervasive, we ask, “What does it mean to publish data in a data commons?” Here we present the OSDC perspective and discuss several services that are key in architecting data commons, including digital identifier services.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86317", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86318" } }
{"authors":"James Sherman::Appalachian State University--Michael Link::Colorado State University--Yong Zhou::Appalachian State University--", "title":"A41K-0221: Summer-winter differences in the relationships among background southeastern U.S. aerosol optical, micro-physical, and chemical properties", "abstract":"Relationships among aerosol optical, micro-physical, and chemical properties are useful for evaluating regional climate models, developing satellite-based aerosol retrievals, and understanding aerosol sources and processes. Since aerosol loading and optical properties vary primarily on seasonal scales in the southeastern U.S., it is important that such studies be carried out over multiple seasons but few (if any) such multi-season studies have been conducted in the region. The high-elevation, semi-rural AppalAIR facility at Appalachian State University in Boone, NC (1080m ASL, 36.210N, 81.690W) is home to the only co-located NOAA-ESRL and AERONET monitoring sites in the eastern U.S. Measurements of size-resolved, non-refractory sub-1µm aerosol composition were also made by a co-located AMS during the 2012-2013 summers and 2013 winter. Systematic relationships among aerosol optical, microphysical, and chemical properties were developed to better understand aerosol sources and processes and for use in higher-dimension aerosol classification schemes. Some of the major findings will be presented. Higher values of lower tropospheric aerosol light scattering coefficient at 550nm (a proxy for aerosol loading) are associated with higher single-scattering albedo (SSA) and lower hemispheric backscatter fraction (b) during both summer and winter. Absorption Angstrom exponent (AAE) is typically well under 1 during summer and near 1.3-1.4 during winter. Lowest summer AAE values coincide with large, highly-reflective particles and higher aerosol light scattering coefficient but summer AAE is only weakly anti-correlated with organic and sulfate mass concentrations. Winter AAE is consistent with a mixture of elemental carbon and light-absorbing organic carbon, possibly influenced by regional residential wood-burning during winter. The hygroscopic dependence of visible light scattering is sensitive to sulfate and organic aerosol mass fractions during both summer and winter. Hemispheric backscatter fraction is ~30% higher in winter than summer. Scattering Angstrom exponent is a less sensitive indicator of fine-mode aerosol size than b and is more sensitive to fine-mode aerosol fraction. SSA, b, and AAE are also sensitive to changes in scattering coefficient.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86318", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86319" } }
{"authors":"Markus Berli::Desert Research Institute--Jelle Dijkema::Desert Research Institute--Jeremy Koonce::Desert Research Institute--Teamrat Ghezzehei::University of California Merced--Martine van der Ploeg::Wageningen University--Martinus Van Genuchten::UFRJ Federal University of Rio de Janeiro--", "title":"H33B-1587: Liquid Water and Vapor Flow in Arid Soil: Comparison of Weighing Lysimeter Data with Simulations from a Process-Based Model", "abstract":"Desert soils account for about a third of the Earth’s land surface and are believed to be important players in terrestrial energy balance. However, the mechanisms that govern energy and mass fluxes across the land-atmosphere interface of hot deserts remain poorly understood. This knowledge gap also spills over to our insufficient understanding of the ecology and hydrology of deserts. A recently constructed weighing lysimeter (3 m deep and 2.26 m in diameter) located in Boulder City, NV, provides data of water and energy fluxes across the soil-atmosphere boundary of the Mojave Desert. The lysimeter has been filled with homogenized desert soil from nearby Eldorado Valley, instrumented with a suite of more than 150 sensors at multiple depth between 2.5 and 250 cm and under continuous operation since July 2008. In this study, we report on water content, water potential, and temperature data from one hydrologic year at high spatial and temporal resolutions. The data was used to develop, calibrate and validate a coupled, process-based water flow and storage model using Hydrus-1D. The model simulates liquid water flow, heat flow, and non-isothermal vapor flow along the soil profile. Detailed soil bulk density and porosity profiles are known based on soil mass and volume determined during lysimeter soil installation. Water retention property was determined from concurrent volumetric water content and matric potential measurements. A density-dependent scaling relation was developed to adjust water retention properties to the different soil bulk densities in the profile. The water flux across the soil-atmosphere boundary was determined from high-resolution lysimeter scale data. The saturated hydraulic conductivity was estimated via inverse modeling, using a subset of the soil moisture data. The calibrated model was validated using the remainder of the data set. The model accurately captures the soil temperature dynamics through the year and across the profile. The water content dynamics was also captured very well, except when the water potential of the near surface soil dropped below -100 MPa. This suggests that the bundle-of-capillaries based coupling of water retention and hydraulic conductivity breaks down at such low matric potentials, where vapor flow is likely the dominant water flow mechanism.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86319", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86321" } }
{"authors":"Jason Herrin::Nanyang Technological University--Kerry Sieh::Nanyang Technological University--Weerachat Wiwegwin::Bureau of Environmental Geology--Punya Charusiri::Chulalungkorn University--Bradley Singer::University of Wisconsin Madison--Khamphao Singsomboun::Department of Geology and Mines--Brian Jicha::University of Wisconsin Madison--", "title":"V23B-3108: DISTRIBUTION AND EVOLUTION OF VOLCANISM OF THE BOLAVEN PLATEAU, SOUTHERN LAOS", "abstract":"The Bolaven Plateau of southern Laos hosts a 6000 km2 basaltic volcanic complex erupted through flat-lying Mesozoic non-marine clastic sedimentary rocks. It is among the largest of dozens of isolated intracontinental Neogene-Quaternary volcanic centers in southeast Asia. The most voluminous flow sequences are tholeiitic, but a significant component of alkalic basalt is also present as morphologically younger cinder cones and related flows that cap the Plateau. Two salient aspects of the volcanic field are these: (1) Lava compositions appear to transition temporally from tholeiitic to alkaline, suggesting that the field tapped low-degree partial melts of a fresh mantle source toward the end of its lifespan. Circumstantial evidence for this can be found in abundant spinel lherzolite, wehrlite, and olivine websterite xenoliths within the alkaline basalts. (2) The volcanic center appears to have initiated atop a pre-existing 1000 m high, 90 km wide bedrock plateau, with nearly all visible vents confined to a 30-km wide zone that extends 80-km north to south. Our work on the Bolaven volcanic complex aims at establishment of a geochemical and temporal framework for its evolution. Using field relationships, petrologic and geochemical studies, and 40Ar/39Ar dating, we hope to unravel the genetic and age relationships of these compositionally varied lava sequences. Another objective of our investigation is to assess the possibility that lavas of the Bolaven might mask the heretofore undiscovered impact site of the Australasian tektite strewnfield (see Sieh et al, this meeting). Toward this aim, we will determine whether a sufficient expanse of the volcanic field is younger than the 0.8 Ma tektites. Finally, we intend to constrain the timing of incision of the Bolaven Plateau by the Mekong River and its tributaries.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86321", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86322" } }
{"authors":"Xiaocong Wang::Institute of Atmospheric Physics,Chinese Academy of Sciences--Minghua Zhang::Stony Brook University--", "title":"A51F-0123: Vertical Velocity in Shallow Convection for Different Plume Types", "abstract":"This study investigates the bulk budgets of the vertical velocity and its parameterization in convective cores, convective updrafts, and clouds by using large-eddy simulation (LES) of four shallow convection cases in the Global Energy and Water Cycle Experiment (GEWEX) Cloud System Study (GCSS) programs. The relative magnitudes of the dominant momentum budget terms for the three types of plumes are presented. For all shallow cumulus except stratocumulus, the buoyancy force and the subplume transport in the core plume are the momentum source that offset the pressure gradient force. In the cloud updraft and cloud plumes, the buoyancy source is dominant in the lower and middle parts of the clouds, while the subgrid transport is a dominant source in the upper part, and the entrainment term is also a momentum source. For the stratocumulus, the subplume transport is a sink almost in the whole convective layer. For all types of plumes, the Simpson and Wiggert (1969) equation is found to be good paramaterization of the mean plume vertical velocity when appropriate scaling coefficients to buoyancy and entrainment terms are used. Optimal forms of the Simpson and Wiggert equation are given for convective cores, convective updrafts, and convective clouds. Results are compared with other studies published in the literature.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86322", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86323" } }
{"authors":"Milton Martínez::NOAA National Ice Center--", "title":"C41D-0765: Interactive Multisensor Snow and Ice Mapping System (IMS) refinement utilizing GHCN-D dataset", "abstract":"The objective of this research is to provide an alternative data sources for the Ice Mapping System (IMS) Blended Snow Depth product, which is provided by NOAA Satellite and Information Services (NESDIS) for National Centers for Environmental Predictions (NCEP) operational models for weather and climate forecasting. The current IMS Blended Snow Depth applies current algorithm provides in-situ data from NESDIS US Cooperative sites that are nearly 1 day old. The replacement of the day old cooperative sites with current National Climatic Data Center’s (NCDC) Global Historical Climatology Network-Daily (GHCN-D) product should help provide more accurate Snow Depth estimates and forecasts. In order to provide said results, refinements had to be done by extracting data from the GHCN-D product and to evaluate the changes in data source compared to the current baseline. Two winter time periods were evaluated for 2010 and 2015. The results demonstrated the use of GHCN-D in the IMS snow blending algorithm improved accuracy, particularly over the CONUS area. ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86323", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86324" } }
{"authors":"Princess Hope Bilgera::Marine Science Institute, University of the Philippines--", "title":"NH51D-1933: Modelling the 2013 Typhoon Haiyan storm surge: Effect of waves, offshore winds, tide phase, and translation speed", "abstract":"Super Typhoon Haiyan, with wind speeds exceeding 300 km h-1 (160 knots) generated a storm surge in San Pedro Bay reaching heights of more than 6m in Tacloban City. Delft Dashboard (DDB), an open-source standalone Matlab based graphical user interface linked to the FLOW and WAVE modeling software of Deltares, was used to develop a coupled flow and wave storm surge model to understand the Typhoon Haiyan storm surge development and propagation. Various experiments were designed to determine the effect of waves, the occurrence of offshore winds prior to the surge, tidal phase, and typhoon translation speed on the surge height. Wave coupling decreased the surge height by about 0.5m probably due to energy dissipation from white capping, bottom friction, and depth-induced breaking. Offshore-directed winds before the arrival of the storm eye resulted to receding of the water level in San Pedro and Cancabato Bay, corroborated by eyewitness and tide gauge data. The experiment wherein the offshore winds were removed resulted to no water receding and a surge with a smaller and gentler surge front, pointing to the importance of the initial water level drawdown in contributing to the destructive power of the wave front. With regard to tides, the effect in Tacloban was actually neither linear nor additive to the surge, with higher surge coincident to low tides and lower surge coincident to high tides. Lastly, the model run with typhoon having a slower translation speed than Haiyan was found to generate higher surges.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86324", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86325" } }
{"authors":"Georgy Manucharyan::Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution--Michael Spall::WHOI--", "title":"GC31A-1160: Wind-Driven Freshwater Buildup in the Beaufort Gyre is Inevitably Constrained by Mesoscale Eddies.", "abstract":"Recently the Beaufort Gyre has accumulated over 20,000km3 of freshwater. This accumulation has been partially attributed to strong anticyclonic atmospheric winds that are prevailing over the gyre for almost two decades. However, mechanisms that can counteract the tendency of the anticyclonic wind stress to deepen the halocline are not well understood. Here, we explore the key physical processes affecting the wind-driven accumulation of freshwater within an idealized high resolution model of the Beaufort Gyre. We demonstrate that an equilibrated halocline (with bulk properties consistent with observations) is achieved when the mesoscale eddy field becomes strong enough to counteract the Ekman pumping. We derive analytical scalings for the depth of the haloclione and its spin-up time scale uncovering the physics behind their strong relation to the eddy dynamics. Our study further suggests that the Beaufort Gyre halocline and its freshwater content are currently in a state of high sensitivity to atmospheric winds. Nonetheless, a significant intensification of surface wind stress would lead to a near saturation of the gyre's freshwater content at about 35m -- a constraint inherently set by the intricacies of the mesoscale eddy dynamics.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86325", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86326" } }
{"authors":"Kaylin Bugbee::University of Alabama in Huntsville--Amanda Weigel::University of Alabama in Huntsville--Rahul Ramachandran::NASA Marshall Space Flight Center--Curt Tilmes::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--", "title":"PA11A-2144: Capturing Data Connections within the Climate Data Initiative to Support Resiliency", "abstract":"The Climate Data Initiative (CDI) focuses on preparing the United States for the impacts of climate change by leveraging existing federal climate-relevant data to stimulate innovation and private-sector entrepreneurship supporting national climate-change preparedness. To achieve these goals, relevant data was curated around seven thematic areas relevant to climate change resiliency. Data for each theme was selected by subject matter experts from various Federal agencies and collected in Data.gov at http://climate.data.gov . While the curation effort for each theme has been immensely valuable on its own, in the end, the themes essentially become a long directory or a list. Establishing valuable connections between datasets and their intended use is lost. Therefore, the user understands that the datasets in the list have been approved by the CDI subject matter experts but has less certainty when making connections between the various datasets and their possible applications. Additionally, the intended use of the curated list is overwhelming and can be difficult to interpret. In order to better address the needs of the CDI data end users, the CDI team has been developing a new controlled vocabulary that will assist in capturing connections between datasets. This new vocabulary will be implemented in the Global Change Information System (GCIS), which has the capability to link individual items within the system. This presentation will highlight the methodology used to develop the controlled vocabulary that will aid end users in both understanding and locating relevant datasets for their intended use.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86326", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86327" } }
{"authors":"Theresa Becchetti::University of California Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources--Jeffrey Stackhouse::University of California Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources--Laura Snell::University of California Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources--David Lile::University of California Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources--Holly George::University of California Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources--John Harper::University of California Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources--Stephanie Larson::University of California Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources--Fadzayi Mashiri::University of California Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources--Morgan Doran::University of California Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources--Sheila Barry::Organization Not Listed--", "title":"GC13E-1210: Matching Livestock Production Systems and Environment", "abstract":"Livestock production systems vary greatly over the world. Producers try to match the resources they have with the demands of production, this can vary by species, class of animal, number of animals, and production goals, etc. Using California’s diversity in production systems as an example, we explored how livestock producers best utilize the forage and feed found in different ecosystems and available in different parts of the state. Livestock grazing, the predominant land use in California and in much of the world, makes efficient use of the natural vegetation produced without additional water (irrigation), minimal inputs such as fertilizer while often supporting a variety of conservation objectives including vegetation management, fire fuels management, and habitat and open space conservation. The numerous by-products produced by other sectors of California’s agriculture as well as food industries, such as brewer’s grain, cottonseeds, and almond hulls are utilized as a feed source for livestock. These by-products are not only an important feed source especially in drought years but are diverted from our waste stream when utilized by livestock. The concept of matching available resources to livestock needs throughout the world is often overlooked and production systems are often over simplified in projects conducting a life cycle analysis or developing carbon foot prints for livestock production systems. This paper provides details on the various production systems found in California, the ecosystem they have adapted to, and how the producers use science and ecological knowledge to match the biological requirements of the livestock and conservation objectives to feed and forage resources.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86327", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86328" } }
{"authors":"Sharon Smith::University of Arkansas--Kosana Suvocarev::University of Arkansas--Michele Reba::USDA, ARS--Benjamin Runkle::University of Arkansas--", "title":"B34A-02: Alternate Wetting and Drying as an Effective Management Practice to Reduce Methane in Arkansas Rice Production", "abstract":"Approximately 15% of the global 308 Tg CH4 emitted by anthropogenic sources is currently attributed to rice cultivation. Arkansas, the leading state in rice cultivation, produces over 42% of the total rice and represents over 43% of total land planted to rice in the US. Although rice production is generally water-intensive, some rice producers have adopted a conservation practice, ‘Alternate Wetting and Drying’ (AWD), in which the flood is released periodically during the growing season. In addition, implementing AWD can reduce CH4 emissions though the introduction of aerobic conditions. To assess the magnitude of this reduction, conventionally flooded (CONV) and AWD fields were identically instrumented for the 2015 season and fluxes of CH4 were measured with an open path IRGA. Other biophysical variables were monitored to determine the relative dominance of potential drivers. Half-hourly CH4 fluxes from the AWD and CONV fields during their similar initial flood (DOY 138-161) were well correlated (R2 = 0.762), indicating similar mechanisms controlling CH4 emissions in both fields. After the initial drydown event in the AWD field (162 DOY), daily median CH4 fluxes continued to rise to 7.80 mg CH4 m-2 h-1 on 163 DOY before subsiding to a local minimum of 0.162 mg CH4 m-2 h-1 on 171 DOY. Daily median CH4 fluxes between 9.24 and 16.0 mg CH4 m-2 h-1 were observed in the CONV field during this same period. Cumulative emissions from both fields following the drydown event and prior to rewetting demonstrated a reduction in CH4 emissions by the AWD treatment by 82%. The substantial decrease in CH4 emissions by AWD in the early growing season supports and expands upon previous chamber-based research and offers strong evidence for the efficacy of AWD in reducing CH4 emissions in AR rice production. The presentation will also assess the latter portion of the growing season, currently underway, and will provide process-based relationships between biophysical parameters and CH­4 emissions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86328", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86329" } }
{"authors":"Mehrez Elwaseif::University of Wyoming--", "title":"NS31A-1959: Joint inversion of Multi-frequency Electromagnetic Induction and Seismic Refraction Data For Improved Near Surface Characterization", "abstract":"We present a joint inversion routine between multi-frequency Electromagnetic (EM) induction and seismic refraction data that is based on using both cross-gradients and disconnect constraints. The joint inverse problem was solved using an iterative nonlinear least-squares formulation. Following each iteration, the cross gradient constraint enforces structural similarities between the EM and seismic models, whereas the disconnect constraint enforces sharp boundaries between different strata within the EM model. The locations of boundaries within the EM model are assumed to be consistent with the locations of user-defined velocity contours in the seismic model. We tested our method on a challenging synthetic EM and seismic model scenario that contains water-bearing zones as well as positively and negatively correlated model parameter values. In addition, we applied our method to GEM-2 and seismic refraction field data sets acquired along a 28-m-long profile in Laramie (WY), and we precisely recorded the locations where ground surface resistivity and velocity likely changes along that line. Unlike the results of separate EM and seismic inversions and the results of joint inversion based only on a cross-gradient constraint, our method was able to detect the water-bearing zones. In addition, it better captured ground surface changes in the field data set.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86329", "section":"Near Surface Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86330" } }
{"authors":"Kathrine Maxwell::National Institute of Geological Sciences, University of the Philippines--Noelynna Ramos::National Institute of Geological Sciences, University of the Philippines--Hiroyuki Tsutsumi::Kyoto University--Fucai Duan::National Taiwan University--Yu-Chen Chou::National Taiwan University--Chuan-Chou Shen::NTU National Taiwan University--", "title":"T43A-2960: Coastal Tectonics and Paleo-sea Level of Northwest Luzon, Philippines Constrained from Raised Coral Terraces", "abstract":"Raised Holocene coral terraces in Badoc and Currimao, Ilocos Norte, Philippines are studied to constrain the Holocene coastal tectonics and sea level history of northwest Luzon, Philippines. Situated 80 km along the northern section of the Manila Trench, Currimao and Badoc, Ilocos Norte prove to be interesting sites for uplift studies along tectonically active coasts. In both localities, uplifted coral reef terraces are well preserved and often separated by meter-scale terrace risers while the lower terraces are usually rocky with well-formed notches. Two to three terrace steps were distinctly identified in both localities in which datable coral samples were gathered from the lower terrace steps (T1 and T2). In Currimao, uplifted coral platforms have two (or possibly three) terrace steps: the lower terrace step (T1) measured 3-3.5 m above mean sea level (amsl) while T2 measured 5 m amsl. Three (to possibly four) terrace steps are documented in Badoc in which the lowest terrace (T1) measured 1-2.5 m, followed by T2 which measured 3-3.5 m, and T3 which measured 4-5 m amsl. Age constraints based on 14C- and 230Th-dating of fossil corals reveal ~6.4 ky and ~6.8 ky for the lower terrace steps of Currimao and Badoc, respectively while ~1 ky-old corals were obtained from the upper terraces of Badoc Island at 4-5 m amsl. Based on these ages, we infer that the ~6 ky-old terraces correspond to the mid-Holocene marine transgression while the ~1 ky-old terrace is probably related to coseismic and/or aseismic uplift. While emerged coral platforms separated by meter-scale terrace risers suggest abrupt uplift mechanisms, emergence may also be attributed to aseismic uplift related to convergence and seamount subduction along the Manila Trench. Holocene uplift rates estimated in Currimao and Badoc are 0.5 to 0.8 mm/yr and 0.4 to 0.7 mm/yr, respectively and are comparatively lower than the maximum Holocene uplift rates reported in Pangasinan (~1.7 mm/yr) and eastern Mindanao (~1.5 mm/yr).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86330", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86331" } }
{"authors":"Laura Crossey::University of New Mexico Main Campus--Jesus Gomez-Velez::New Mexico Tech--John Wilson::New Mexico Tech--Lauren Sherson::US Geological Survey--Cliff Dahm::University of New Mexico Main Campus--", "title":"H33C-1609: The dynamics of stream-aquifer connectivity: an observational study in northern New Mexico", "abstract":"The bidirectional feedback between streams and aquifers changes over several spatio- temporal scales, requiring a complex, multi-variable observational network that captures the dominant processes taking place and the response to changes in hydrologic forcing. The importance of stream-aquifer connectivity is evidenced by its influence in the hydrologic response and in the fate and transport of solutes at the watershed scale. To better understand the dynamics of stream-aquifer connectivity and the effects that intra-annual weather variability has on physical and chemical processes, a monitoring network was installed at a meander bend of the East Fork of the Jemez River in the Valles Caldera National Preserve (VCNP), a snow-dominated watershed in northern New Mexico. This work summarizes four years of observations of groundwater-surface water interaction. Spatio-temporal patterns of water level, temperature, and electrical conductivity were measured in meander-bend wells and vertical fluxes to/from the stream were estimated using in-stream piezometers, subsurface thermal records, and distributed temperature sensing in the channel. A three-dimensional numerical model was used to synthesize data and draw general conclusions. The observational network has been collecting data since the summer of 2010 to present, overlapping the Las Conchas fire in the VCNP (largest wildfire on record in New Mexico’s history), and therefore representing a valuable data set to evaluate the hydrological and biogeochemical implications of wildfire events.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86331", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86332" } }
{"authors":"Theodore Them::Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University--Benjamin Gill::Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University--Darren Gröcke::University of Durham--David Selby::University of Durham--Rowan Martindale::University of Texas at Austin--Andrew Caruthers::Western Michigan University--Emma Tulsky::Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University--", "title":"PP31B-2255: Evidence for Global Biogeochemical Changes During the Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event", "abstract":"The global versus regional nature of the Toarcian Oceanic Anoxic Event (T-OAE; ~183 million years ago) has been heavily debated over the course of the last decade. Several lines of geochemical evidence support a significant perturbation to the carbon cycle and redox-sensitive elemental cycles across this interval. It is thought that these represent feedbacks to the emplacement of the Karoo-Ferrar large igneous province. These include: elevated atmospheric pCO2, an enhanced greenhouse effect and hydrologic cycle leading to increased weathering rates, dissociation of biogenic methane clathrates, and widespread ocean anoxia. Despite evidence for these global phenomena, the overwhelming majority of stratigraphic successions studied are located in Europe. The global magnitude of these biogeochemical perturbations has been challenged, with some considering that this event was regional to Europe, and others suggesting that the carbon isotope excursion (CIE) itself is not a reliable stratigraphic marker. In order to test these competing hypotheses, we have generated a geochemical dataset to reconstruct paleoceanographic and paleoclimatological changes across the T-OAE from western North America. The Toarcian strata in western Alberta consist primarily of organic-rich calcareous siltstones and shales. These deposits represent ideal sedimentary facies to reconstruct environmental changes through the use of geochemical proxy data, especially those that use redox-sensitive transition metals. Ammonite biostratigraphy suggests a nearly continuous sequence from the late Pliensbachian to middle Toarcian. The organic carbon isotopes show the prominent negative CIE interpreted to relate to the release of isotopically depleted carbon at the onset of the T-OAE. Pyrite sulfur weight percentages increase across the CIE and remain elevated, and iron speciation data suggest the development of anoxic conditions. Initial osmium isotope compositions become more radiogenic during the CIE, relative to the more unradiogenic values pre- and post-CIE. Taken together, these geochemical data from western North America support the hypothesis that many of the changes to biogeochemical cycles observed from European strata are in fact a global phenomenon.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86332", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86333" } }
{"authors":"Donna Charlevoix::UNAVCO, Inc. Boulder--", "title":"ED53D-0875: Evaluating an EPO Program in an NSF Facility: Successes and Challenges of Developing Robust Evaluation with Modest Resources", "abstract":"Many science and technology facilities, as well as science-focused non-profits have directorates or divisions dedicated to education, outreach, and often communications. These Education and Outreach programs typically have complex portfolios of projects and sub-programs ranging from communications and general outreach to professional training and development of key stakeholders. UNAVCO’s Education and Community Engagement (ECE) Program provides outreach, education and communications services to the NSF geodetic facility. Specific areas of focus for ECE include: professional development and training, educational materials development and dissemination, community communications, and a geo-workforce development sub-program. Activities within these four areas are determined through a combination of strategic planning and resource availability. Since 2013, the ECE program has worked toward developing a robust planning and evaluation process. Annual strategic planning sessions identify the scope of work for the coming year. An annual implementation plan is developed from these sessions including specific tasks, targets and performance metrics. Quarterly review of progress and realignment of work guides the program and a formal internal evaluation of annual work progress informs the following year’s scope of work. The UNAVCO ECE program has consulted with external evaluators on this process and has incorporated suggestions to improve the process after the first year. This presentation will provide an overview of the implementation plan and evaluation process. We will share with the community the successes and challenges of developing a robust evaluation plan that incorporates all program portfolio elements.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86333", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86334" } }
{"authors":"Jeremy Miner::Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology--Max Enders::Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology--Robert Busby::Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology--", "title":"S33D-2819: Technology and Engineering Advances Supporting EarthScope’s Alaska Transportable Array", "abstract":"EarthScope’s Transportable Array (TA) in Alaska and Canada is an ongoing deployment of 261 high quality broadband seismographs. The Alaska TA is the continuation of the rolling TA/USArray deployment of 400 broadband seismographs in the lower 48 contiguous states and builds on the success of the TA project there. The TA in Alaska and Canada is operated by the IRIS Consortium on behalf of the National Science Foundation as part of the EarthScope program. By Sept 2015, it is anticipated that the TA network in Alaska and Canada will be operating 105 stations. During the summer of 2015, TA field crews comprised of IRIS and HTSI station specialists, as well as representatives from our partner agencies the Alaska Earthquake Center and the Alaska Volcano Observatory and engineers from the UNAVCO Plate Boundary Observatory will have completed a total of 36 new station installations. Additionally, we will have completed upgrades at 9 existing Alaska Earthquake Center stations with borehole seismometers and the adoption of an additional 35 existing stations. Continued development of battery systems using LiFePO4 chemistries, integration of BGAN, Iridium, Cellular and VSAT technologies for real time data transfer, and modifications to electronic systems are a driving force for year two of the Alaska Transportable Array. Station deployment utilizes custom heliportable drills for sensor emplacement in remote regions. The autonomous station design evolution include hardening the sites for Arctic, sub-Arctic and Alpine conditions as well as the integration of rechargeable Lithium Iron Phosphate batteries with traditional AGM batteries We will present new design aspects, outcomes, and lessons learned from past and ongoing deployments, as well as efforts to integrate TA stations with other existing networks in Alaska including the Plate Boundary Observatory and the Alaska Volcano Observatory.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86334", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86335" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"A43C-0296: Carboxylic Acid Photochemistry is a Marine Source of Glyoxal and Other Aldehydes", "abstract":"Glyoxal is a highly water-soluble precursor in secondary organic aerosol (SOA) formation. Over land, glyoxal is known to be produced by the oxidation of volatile organic carbon (VOC) from both anthropogenic and natural sources. However, marine sources are still not well understood. Previous studies above the remote Pacific Ocean have detected typical glyoxal mixing ratios of 30-40 pptv, concentrations too high to be explained with current chemical understanding or atmospheric models. Because the lifetime of glyoxal is very short, the glyoxal found must have originated from, rather than been transported to, the open ocean. Furthermore, eddy covariance measurements indicate that an organic surface microlayer may be producing the glyoxal by as yet unknown processes. Here we present laboratory studies of the formation of glyoxal from carboxylic acids. Nonanoic, octanoic, and heptanoic acids floated on water and subjected to ultraviolet light are converted into their equivalent alkenals. Subsequent ozonolysis of the alkenals leads to the formation of glyoxal. We employ a PTR-MS to detect the alkenals, and a cavity-enhanced DOAS to detect the glyoxal. Considering the ubiquitous occurrence of carboxylic acids and their derivatives in the environment, this mechanism has the potential to be a significant source of glyoxal in the atmosphere.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86335", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86336" } }
{"authors":"Cory Martin::University of Maryland College Park--Ning Zeng::University of Maryland College Park--", "title":"A21G-0244: A low-cost sensor for high density urban CO2 monitoring", "abstract":"The high spatial-termporal variability of greenhouse gases and other pollution sources in an urban environment can not be easily resolved with current high-accuracy but expensive instruments. We have tested a small, low-cost NDIR CO2 sensor designed for potential use. It has a manufacturer’s specified accuracy of +- 30 parts per million (ppm). However, initial results running parallel with a research-grade greenhouse gas analyzer have shown that the absolute accuracy of the sensor is within +-5ppm, suggesting their utility for sensing ambient air variations in carbon dioxide. Through a multivariate analysis, we have determined a correction procedure that when accounting for environmental temperature, humidity, air pressure, and the device’s span and offset, we can further increase the accuracy of the collected data. We will show results from rooftop measurements over a period of one year and CO2 tracking data in the Washington-Baltimore Metropolitan area.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86336", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86338" } }
{"authors":"Chun Sik Chae::JPL/NASA/Caltech--", "title":"H53F-1722: Advanced Microwave Radiometer (AMR) for SWOT mission", "abstract":"The objective of the SWOT (Surface Water & Ocean Topography) satellite mission is to measure wide-swath, high resolution ocean topography and terrestrial surface waters. Since main payload radar will use interferometric SAR technology, conventional microwave radiometer system which has single nadir look antenna beam (i.e., OSTM/Jason-2 AMR) is not ideally applicable for the mission for wet tropospheric delay correction. Therefore, SWOT AMR incorporates two antenna beams along cross track direction. In addition to the cross track design of the AMR radiometer, wet tropospheric error requirement is expressed in space frequency domain (in the sense of cy/km), in other words, power spectral density (PSD). Thus, instrument error allocation and design are being done in PSD which are not conventional approaches for microwave radiometer requirement allocation and design. A few of novel analyses include: 1. The effects of antenna beam size to PSD error and land/ocean contamination, 2. Receiver error allocation and the contributions of radiometric count averaging, NEDT, Gain variation, etc. 3. Effect of thermal design in the frequency domain. In the presentation, detailed AMR design and analyses results will be discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86338", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86339" } }
{"authors":"Sahil Agarwal::Yale University--John Wettlaufer::University of Oxford Yale University--", "title":"NG23B-1796: Stochastic Upper Bounds in the Lorenz Equations and Applications to Geophysical Flows and Data.", "abstract":"Many geophysical systems are described by chaotic nonlinear systems of equations. A natural question arising is the relative roles of chaos and stochastic fluctuations. We calculate the stochastic upper bounds for the Lorenz equations using an extension of the background method. In analogy with Rayleigh-B\'enard convection the upper bounds are for heat transport versus Rayleigh number. As might be expected the stochastic upper bounds are larger than the deterministic counterpart of Souza & Doering (2015). but their variation with noise amplitude exhibits interesting behavior. Below the transition to chaotic dynamics the upper bounds increase monotonically with noise amplitude. However, in the chaotic regime this monotonicity depends on the number of realizations in the ensemble; at a particular Rayleigh number the bound may increase or decrease with noise amplitude. The origin of this behavior is the coupling between the noise and unstable periodic orbits, the degree of which depends on the degree to which the ensemble represents the ergodic set. This is confirmed by examining the close returns plots of the full solutions to the stochastic equations. Finally, we note that these solutions demonstrate that the effect of noise is equivalent to the effect of chaos. Such results have a wide range of implications in geophysical fluid dynamics.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86339", "section":"Nonlinear Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86340" } }
{"authors":"Carol Griggs::Cornell University--John Southon::University of California Irvine--Bernd Kromer::University of Heidelberg--", "title":"PP11A-2205: The Potential for an Independent Source of Younger Dryas Tree-Ring Radiocarbon Data from the Lake Ontario Region, NE North America, and its Paleoenvironmental Context: a Preliminary Report", "abstract":"Tree rings are the gold standard for the calibration of radiocarbon dates into calendar years with limited error due to their annual record of radiocarbon content in the atmosphere. Currently, the tree-ring 14C data used in the International Radiocarbon Calibration curve (IntCal13) are from multiple sources back to ~ 10 ka cal BP for the northern hemisphere. However, the source for tree-ring calibration data prior to ~10 ka cal BP, including the Younger Dryas (YD) and most of the Early Holocene (EH) chronozones, is limited to central Europe. Substantial quantities of logs found in the lowlands of Lake Ontario in North America, dating from 12.1 to 11.2 ka cal BP, have great potential for providing unique YD-EH tree-ring 14C data from a new, previously unrepresented, geographic location and for adding a new perspective to ongoing debates such as the timing of the YD/EH transition in continental North America. Preliminary fieldwork yielded over 43 logs, predominantly spruce (Picea spp.), found buried in alluvial strata over 0.2 hectares of the floodplain at Bell Creek near Fulton, NY. Dendrochronological analysis of 32 spruce logs from this collection has produced several chronologies, one 183 years in length and a second of 147 years with a possible crossdate yielding a chronology of 260 years. Ongoing survey of the site suggests that there is high preservation potential in the same stratigraphic units in an additional ~2 hectares of floodplain, and sample collection with subsequent analysis will increase the chronology’s sample depth, extend its length, and potentially provide a robust, independent Younger Dryas – Early Holocene 14C record. Initial assessments of climatic, hydrological, environmental, and isostatic variations and events over time from the tree rings and their stable isotopes, as well as pollen, macrofossil, and sediment analyses and isostatic modeling indicate substantial changes in the Bell Creek Valley and surrounding lowlands both during the YD and into the mid-Holocene. These changes include significant alterations in the rate, volume, and direction of stream flow, and transition from a boreal riparian environment on a low-order river to a wetlands, then back to a riparian environment with much less streamflow and occasional flooding, similar to the Bell Creek Valley today.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86340", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86341" } }
{"authors":"Kazue Suzuki::ISM Institute of Statistical Mathematics--Shinya Nakano::Organization Not Listed--Genta Ueno::The Inst of Statistical Math--Nobuhito Mori::Kyoto University--Sota Nakajo::Kumamoto University--", "title":"NG23B-1797: An introduction of a new stochastic tropical cyclone model for Japan area", "abstract":"The extreme events such as tropical cyclones (TC), downpours, floods, and so on, have huge influences on the human life in the past, present, and future. In particular, the change in their risks on the human life under the future climate has been concerned by the governments and researchers. Our aim is to estimate the probabilities for frequencies of TC which could attack to Japan under the future climate that calculated by GCMs. For carrying out this subject, it is needed a suitable rare event sampling method to find TCs that land on big cities in Japan. Moreover, it requires sufficient reproductions of TCs for calculation of their probabilities, too.  The model for TC reproductions is designed with three parts following the lifecycle of TC; formation, maturity and decay. However, we don’t treat the part of maturity with physical equations because the maturity process is complicated to express as a stochastic model. The TC intensity model will take the place of this physical part.  Several stochastic TC models have been developed for different purposes and problems. Our model is developed for the establishment of a rare event sampling method. Here, the comparisons of behaviors of TC tracks among several stochastic TC models will be discussed using Best Track data provided by Japan Meteorological Agency and MRI-AGCM data for the present climate.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86341", "section":"Nonlinear Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86342" } }
{"authors":"Katherine Schide::University of Utah--Paul Jewell::University of Utah--Charles Oviatt::Kansas State Univ--Harry Jol::University of Wisconsin Eau Claire--", "title":"PP13B-2280:  An Investigation of Transgressive Deposits in Late Pleistocene Lake Bonneville using GPR and UAV-produced DEMs.", "abstract":"Lake Bonneville was the largest of the Pleistocene pluvial lakes that once filled the Great Basin of the interior western United States. Its two most prominent shorelines, Bonneville and Provo, are well documented but many of the lake’s intermediate shoreline features have yet to be studied. These transgressive barriers and embankments mark short-term changes in the regional water budget and thus represent a proxy for local climate change. The internal and external structures of these features are analyzed using the following methods: ground penetrating radar, 5 meter auto-correlated DEMs, 1-meter DEMs generated from LiDAR, high-accuracy handheld GPS, and 3D imagery collected with an unmanned aerial vehicle. These methods in mapping, surveying, and imaging provide a quantitative analysis of regional sediment availability, transportation, and deposition as well as changes in wave and wind energy. These controls help define climate thresholds and rates of landscape evolution in the Great Basin during the Pleistocene that are then evaluated in the context of global climate change.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86342", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86343" } }
{"authors":"Yongwei Sheng::University of California Los Angeles--Chunqiao Song::University of California Los Angeles--Jida Wang::Kansas State University University of California Los Angeles--Dorian Garibay::University of California Los Angeles--Jordan Woods::University of California Los Angeles--Evan Lyons::University of California Los Angeles--Laurence Smith::University of California Los Angeles--", "title":"H53F-1723: Automated Quality Assurance and Quality Control (QA/QC) in Developing Decadal Global Lake Dynamics Products using Landsat-7 and 8", "abstract":"Inland lakes, important water resources, play a crucial role in the global water cycle and are sensitive to climate change and human activities. There clearly is a pressing need to understand temporal and spatial variations of lakes at global and continental scales. To inventory dynamics of global lakes is rather challenging due to their high abundance and low accessibility. With its broad spatial coverage and monitoring capability, satellite remote sensing is the only feasible approach to inventory global lake dynamics, but requires tens of thousands of high-resolution satellite images, automated mapping algorithms, and more importantly tedious yet essential quality assurance and quality control (QA/QC) procedures. Millions of lakes have been mapped out using over 20 thousands Landsat images acquired at lake-stable seasons. Even though a set of highly replicable and automated lake mapping algorithms and tools have been developed, commission and omission errors still exist and some lake boundaries may not be adequately delineated. These errors need to be identified and fixed through intensive QA/QC processes. However, QA/QC of such a huge quantity of lakes remains a great challenge, and the currently available lake datasets from remote sensing were not produced through a rigorous QA/QC process. We have developed two QA/QC strategies with automation. Automated QA requires mapping the Earth twice in the same seasons for lakes and identifies “inconsistent” lakes for further QA/QC. Other lakes without significant changes are considered quality assured, and labor-intensive QA/QC is only limited to those “inconsistent” lakes. We have also developed semi-automated QC tools to further reduce the workload for manpower, and have produced a high-resolution systematically-generated circa-2000 global lake database with adequate QA/QC using Landsat-7. The recent operation of Landsat 8 extends the unprecedented Landsat record to over 40 years, allowing long-term, large-scale lake dynamics mapping. A circa-2015 dataset of lake extents and distributions is being produced using multi-temporal Landsat-8 images acquired in lake-stable seasons. As such, seasonal and inter-annual variability is addressed in the circa-2015 product, significantly reducing the QA/QC workload.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86343", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86344" } }
{"authors":"Carl Rosier::Oklahoma State University--Estella Atekwana::Oklahoma State University Main Campus--Amber Price::Oklahoma State University Main Campus--Sundeep Sharma::Oklahoma State University--Mariana Patrauchan::Oklahoma State University Main Campus--", "title":"H41K-08: Evaluating the use of Spectral Induced Conductivity to Detect Biofilm Development within Porous Media", "abstract":"Microbial biomass accumulation in subsurface sediments dynamically alters porosity/permeability; factors critical to contaminant transport and management of bioremediation efforts. Current methodologies (i.e. plate counts, tracer/slug tests) offer some understanding of biofilm effect on subsurface hydrology, yet do not provide real-time information regarding biofilm development. Due to these limitations there is interest in assessing the near surface geophysical technique Spectral Induced Polarization (SIP), to measure biofilm formation. Our study assesses the influence of cell density and biofilm production on SIP response. Laboratory experiments monitored changes in SIP, measured colony forming units (CFU), and cellular protein levels on sand packed columns inoculated with either Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1 (non-mucoid strain) or Pseudomonas aeruginosa FRD1 (biofilm-overproducing mucoid strain) cells over one month. Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) were used to confirm the presence of biofilm. Our results indicate that phase and imaginary conductivity remained stable in PAO1 treatments as cell densities and cellular protein levels remained low (1.7x105 CFUml-1; 111 µg ml-1). However, we observed a significant decrease in both phase (0.5 to -0.20 mrad) and imaginary conductivity (0.0 to -3.0x10-5 S m-1) when both cell densities and cellular protein levels increased. In FRD1 treatments we observed an immediate decrease in phase (0.1 mrad) and imaginary conductivity (-2.0x10-6 S m-1) as cell densities were an order of magnitude greater then PAO1 treatments and cellular protein levels surpassed 500 µg ml-1. CLSM and SEM analysis confirmed the presence of biofilm and cells within both PAO1 and FRD1 treatments. Our findings suggest that the ratio of cells to cellular protein production is an important factor influencing both phase and imaginary conductivity response. However, our results are not in agreement with previous studies suggesting large phase shift (~50 mrads) and imaginary conductivity (5.5 S m-1) values due to biofilm development. We hypothesize that large phase shift and imaginary conductivity response are due to trapping of conductive materials within the biofilm matrix, studies are currently underway to address this hypothesis.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86344", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86345" } }
{"authors":"Bruce Hungate::Northern Arizona University Northern Arizona University--Kees Jan Van Groenigen::Northern Arizona University--Craig Osenberg::University of Georgia--Natasja van Gestel::Northern Arizona University--", "title":"B13H-07: Long-term Ecosystem Experiments, Data Assimilation, and Meta-Analysis", "abstract":"Land ecosystems affect climate and the atmosphere, and climate and atmospheric change affects ecosystems. Syntheses of ecosystem experiments investigating their responses to environmental change holds promise for understanding how to model these interactions, and thereby gain insight into Earth’s future biosphere, atmosphere, and climate. Long-term experiments examining ecosystem responses are thought to be especially important in this effort, for their potential to reveal cumulative and progressive effects, subtle effects initially undetectable experimentally, but manifest more clearly over time, often with stronger implications for modeled responses than the more dramatic, short-term experimental responses. Here, we present new analyses of long-term experiments manipulating temperature, CO2 concentration, and precipitation, testing the general hypothesis that there are common temporal patterns of responses that reveal general biogeochemical characterizing ecosystem responses to these environmental changes. For example, we show that increased carbon input with elevated CO2 stimulates emissions of nitrous oxide and methane, important greenhouse gases, and that effects show no signs of diminishing over the duration of experiments that have documented responses. At the same time, we show that the temporal resolution for this response is limited, pointing to a potential limitation in the ability of experiments to address clearly long-term hypotheses. We also show that warming tends to have limited cumulative effects on total soil carbon stocks in long-term experiments, and explore the mechanisms underlying this response. Finally, we discuss the implications of these findings for models used to simulate long-term ecosystem responses to these environmental forcings, as well as the implications of these findings for the next generation of terrestrial ecosystem experiments.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86345", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86346" } }
{"authors":"Denis Kosmach::Pacific Oceanological Institute FEB RAS Tomsk Polytecnical University--Igor Semiletov::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Natalia Shakhova::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Anatoly Salyuk::Pacific Oceanological Institute FEB RAS--", "title":"C43A-0784: The East Siberian Arctic Shelf is a significant source of atmospheric methane as referred from multi-year ship-based observations (2000-2015)", "abstract":"According to NOAA/CMDL data, the highest concentration and greatest seasonal amplitudes of atmospheric methane (CH4) occur at 60–70N, outside the 30–60N band where the main sources of anthropogenic CH4 is located, indicating that the northern environment is a source of these gases. Analyses of ice core samples also suggest a strong pole-to-pole gradient existing during inter-glacial epochs back to preindustrial times, which is independent of anthropogenic activity. The global budget of CH4 established >40 years ago, when very little knowledge existed about Arctic terrestrial sources and nothing was known about Arctic marine sources, has never considered contribution of Arctic sources of CH4 adequately. Here we present results of the multiyear high-precision continuous measurements across the Barents Sea, the Kara Sea, the Laptev Sea, the East Siberian Sea, the Chukchi Sea, the Bering Sea, the Sea of Okhotsk and the Japan Sea performed during one expedition in each of two years (2011 and 2012). Results of our investigations demonstrate that concentrations of dissolved CH4 measured in the surface water in all 8 seas were supersaturated regards to the atmosphere. However, anomalously high concentrations of dissolved CH4 in the surface water (up to 5,000-12,000% of super-saturation) was found in the East Siberian Arctic Shelf, which is composed of the Laptev Sea, the East Siberian Sea and the Chukchi Sea.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86346", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86347" } }
{"authors":"Ashley Grijalva::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--Marsella Kachingwe::Penn State University--Andy Nyblade::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--Donna Shillington::Columbia University of New York--James Gaherty::Organization Not Listed--Cynthia Ebinger::University of Rochester--Natalie Accardo::Columbia University of New York--John Paul O'Donnell::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--Gabriel Mbogoni::Geological Survey of Tanzania--Gabriel Mulibo::University of Dar es Salaam--Richard Ferdinand::University of Dar es Salaam--Patrick Chindandali::Geological Survey of Malawi--Felix Mphepo::Geological Survey of Malawi--", "title":"T51G-3001: Upper mantle P-wave velocity structure beneath northern Lake Malawi and the Rungwe Volcanic Province, East Africa", "abstract":"A recent deployment of 55 broadband seismic stations around the northern Lake Malawi rift as part of the SEGMeNT project have provided a new dataset for imaging crustal and upper mantle structure beneath the Rungwe volcanic center and northern most segment of the Lake Malawi Rift. The goal of our study is to characterize the upper mantle velocity structure and determine to what extent the rifting has been influenced by magmatism. P relative arrival time residuals have been obtained for 115 teleseismic events with magnitudes > 5 in the 30 - 90 degree distance range. They are being tomographically inverted, together with travel time residuals from previous deployments for a 3-D velocity model of the upper mantle. Preliminary results indicate a low wave speed anomaly in the uppermost mantle beneath the Rungwe volcanics. Future results will determine if this anomaly exists under the northern Lake Malawi rift.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86347", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86348" } }
{"authors":"Rodrigo Eco::National Institute of Geological Sciences, University of the Philippines--Alfredo mahar Lagmay::Nationwide Operational Assessment of Hazards--Tatum Miko Herrero::National Institute of Geological Sciences, University of the Philippines--Anieri Morales Rivera::University of Miami--Falk Amelug::University of Miami--", "title":"V23B-3103: Slope movement and instability in Kanlaon Volcano, Philippines", "abstract":"Kanlaon is an active stratovolcano with at least 29 recorded eruptions since 1899. It is one of the few volcanoes in the Philippines with known debris avalanche deposits associated to it. The deposit is characterized by prominent hummocks distributed at least 300 sq. km. in the southwest side of the volcano. Stratovolcanoes are known to be inherently unstable due to numerous factors such as overburden, edifice discontinuities, basement structures and magmatic migration. Catastrophic debris avalanches are often the consequence of this instability. Lineaments and collapse structures were mapped by interpreting a high-resolution topographic model of the volcano. Several arcuate scarp structures opening southwest towards the direction of the deposit are clearly seen, most likely the amphitheater from the debris avalanche. Most prominent are those near the summit, where more recent eruptions have overlain most of the amphitheater. In addition, clusters of N-S, NNW-SSE, and NE-SW lineaments are seen in the SE to the SW flank of the volcano, possibly a manifestation of spreading or downward movement to the south or southwest, where the debris avalanche deposits are. InSAR time-series analysis using ascending ALOS PALSAR imagery acquired from 2007-2011 shows LOS range decrease at a rate of ~2 cm/yr in the western flank of Kanlaon near the summit. During this period, there was no eruption in the volcano, with the last an explosive phreatic eruption on June 2006, prior to the acquisition of the imagery. The gradual movement appears to be constrained within the old collapsed sector of the volcano and may be related to potential incipient flank instability controlled by edifice discontinuities.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86348", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86349" } }
{"authors":"Francisco Munoz-Arriola::University of Nebraska Lincoln--Katherine Smith::University of Nebraska Lincoln--Gerald Corzo::UNESCO-IHE� Institute for Water Education--Juan Chacon::UNESCO-IHE� Institute for Water Education--Carlos Carrillo-Cruz::University of Nebraska Lincoln--", "title":"H11I-1461: Large-scale Agroecosytem’s Resiliency to Extreme Hydrometeorological and Climate Extreme Events in the Missouri River Basin", "abstract":"A major challenge for water, energy and food security relies on the capability of agroecosyststems and ecosystems to adapt to a changing climate and land use changes. The interdependency of these forcings, understood through our ability to monitor and model processes across scales, indicate the “depth” of their impact on agroecosystems and ecosystems, and consequently our ability to predict the system’s ability to return to a “normal” state. We are particularly interested in explore two questions: (1) how hydrometeorological and climate extreme events (HCEs) affect sub-seasonal to interannual changes in evapotranspiration and soil moisture? And (2) how agroecosystems recover from the effect of such events. To address those questions we use the land surface hydrologic Variable Infiltration Capacity (VIC) model and the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrometer-Leaf Area Index (MODIS-LAI) over two time spans (1950-2013 using a seasonal fixed LAI cycle) and 2001-2013 (an 8-day MODIS-LAI). VIC is forced by daily/16th degree resolution precipitation, minimum and maximum temperature, and wind speed. In this large-scale experiment, resiliency is defined by the capacity of a particular agroecosystem, represented by a grid cell’s ET, SM, and LAI to return to a historical average. This broad, yet simplistic definition will contribute to identify the possible components and their scales involved in agroecosystems and ecosystems capacity to adapt to the incidence of HCEs and technologies used to intensify agriculture and diversify their use for food and energy production. Preliminary results show that dynamical changes in land use, tracked by MODIS data, require larger time spans to address properly the influence of technologic improvements in crop production as well as the competition for land for biofuel vs. food production. On the other hand, fixed seasonal changes in land use allow us just to identify hydrologic changes mainly due to climate variability.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86349", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86350" } }
{"authors":"David Turner::NOAA Norman--P Jonathan Gero::University of Wisconsin--Denny Hackel::University of Wisconsin Madison--Coda Phillips::University of Wisconsin Madison--Nadia Smith::University of Wisconsin Madison--Tim Wagner::University of Wisconsin Madison--", "title":"A41F-0121: Networked Thermodynamic Boundary Layer Profiling with AERIs during the PECAN Field Campaign", "abstract":"The Plains Elevated Convection at Night (PECAN) campaign was a large-scale field experiment in the Great Plains region of the U.S. that was conducted in June-July 2015. Nocturnal storms provide the majority of the precipitation in the Great Plains, yet the initiation and evolution of nocturnal convection is not understood to the same level as daytime surface-based convection, and thus provides significant challenges for operational weather forecasters. PECAN’s objectives were to study elevated nocturnal convection initiation and the lifecycle of nocturnal convection. Specific research areas that were studied were the evolution of mesoscale convective systems, the structure and evolution of nocturnal low-level jets, atmospheric bores, and elevated convection initiation. A broad range of fixed and mobile observing systems were deployed by several agencies and organizations in a domain centered around Kansas. The Atmospheric Emitted Radiance Interferometer (AERI) is a ground-based instrument that measures downwelling infrared radiance from the atmosphere. AERI observations can be used to obtain vertical profiles of tropospheric temperature and water vapor in the lowest 3 km of the troposphere, as well as measurements of the concentration of various trace gases and microphysical and optical properties of clouds and aerosols. A network of eight AERIs was deployed in the domain during PECAN, with six at fixed sites and two in mobile facilities. One of the goals of the campaign was a demonstration of the use of real-time high-temporal-resolution boundary layer profiles from the network of AERIs for characterizing the mesoscale environment and its evolution during the weather events sampled during PECAN. If successful, a future network could be implemented across CONUS and thermodynamic profiles in the boundary layer data assimilated to help improve numerical weather prediction. We present an overview of the AERI deployments, a summary of the technique used to retrieve thermodynamic profiles from the AERI’s observed radiances, and results from the AERI retrievals in different atmospheric conditions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86350", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86352" } }
{"authors":"Babak Poursartip::University of Texas at Austin--", "title":"S43B-2786: An Integrated Approach for the Large-Scale Simulation of Sedimentary Basins to Study Seismic Wave Amplification", "abstract":"Seismic hazard assessment to predict the behavior of infrastructures subjected to earthquake relies on ground motion numerical simulation because the analytical solution of seismic waves is limited to only a few simple geometries. Recent advances in numerical methods and computer architectures make it ever more practical to reliably and quickly obtain the near-surface response to seismic events. The key motivation stems from the need to access the performance of sensitive components of the civil infrastructure (nuclear power plants, bridges, lifelines, etc), when subjected to realistic scenarios of seismic events. We discuss an integrated approach that deploys best-practice tools for simulating seismic events in arbitrarily heterogeneous formations, while also accounting for topography. Specifically, we describe an explicit forward wave solver based on a hybrid formulation that couples a single-field formulation for the computational domain with an unsplit mixed-field formulation for Perfectly-Matched-Layers (PMLs and/or M-PMLs) used to limit the computational domain. Due to the material heterogeneity and the contrasting discretization needs it imposes, an adaptive time solver is adopted. We use a Runge-Kutta-Fehlberg time-marching scheme that adjusts optimally the time step such that the local truncation error rests below a predefined tolerance. We use spectral elements for spatial discretization, and the Domain Reduction Method in accordance with double couple method to allow for the efficient prescription of the input seismic motion. Of particular interest to this development is the study of the effects idealized topographic features have on the surface motion when compared against motion results that are based on a flat-surface assumption. We discuss the components of the integrated approach we followed, and report the results of parametric studies in two and three dimensions, for various idealized topographic features, which show motion amplification that depends, as expected, on the relation between the topographic feature’s characteristics and the dominant wavelength. Lastly, we report results involving three-dimensional simulations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86352", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86354" } }
{"authors":"Gerardo Suarez::UNAM National Autonomous University of Mexico--Sergio Aguilar::UNAM National Autonomous University of Mexico--", "title":"S53A-2763: Crustal Deformation in the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, Mexico Observed from Microseismic Data recorded by the VEOX Experiment", "abstract":"An array of 45 broad band sensors was installed across the 300-km-long Isthmus of Techuantepec, in the narrowest part of Mexico. This array was deployed from August of 2007 to March of 2009. Data was recorded in a continous manner in all seismographs throughout the whole deployment period. We used an LTA/STA algorithm to automatically detect earthquakes recorded by the norhernmost stations near the coast of the Gulf of Mexico. Earthquakes recorded by one station were searched in adjaecent sites. This allowed a thorough and systematic search of the seismic traces in order to identify seismic events recorded by the northern segment of the array. The earthquakes culled from the algorithm were filtered in order to include only those with crustal or upper mantle depths that reflect deformation of the overriding plate. Intermediate depth earthquakes occurring within the subducted slab were filtered out. In total, during the 18 month duration of the experiment, 34 earthquakes were clearly identified and located within the crust and the upper mantle. Tests on the location accuracy were conducted using different velocity models proposed for this region. A selection criteria of the best located earthquakes was applied observing the stability of the hypocentral locations to changes in the velocity model. The resulting subset of the best-located earthquakes indicate that the deformation of the upper North American plate is concentrated in the northern part of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, along the coast of the Gulf of Mexico. Only a few events occurred farther inland, to the south of the coast of the Gulf of Mexico. The location of these microseismic events coincides with the location of moderate events recorded in the past. In particular, the largest cluster of microearthquakes occurs near where the 29 August 1959 earthquake. The location and depth of the microearthquakes located further demonstrates that the overriding North American plate is being deformed, probably by the subduction taking place to the south. Considering that this region hosts the largest oil refining facilities in the country, the presence of these microearthquakes demonstrates the need to better understand the tectonic processes present and their impact on the seismic hazard of this region.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86354", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86355" } }
{"authors":"Boyan Gu::Texas A&M University--Ping Yang::Texas A & M University College Station--Kenneth Bowman::Texas A&M Univ--Patrick Minnis::NASA Langley Research Center--", "title":"A53B-0384: Comparison Between RRTM and LBLRTM-DISORT for Radiative Transfer in Scattering Atmospheres", "abstract":"Scattering process is important in radiative transfer. A rapid and accurate radiative transfer model (RRTM) and a combination of the line-by-line radiative transfer model (LBLRTM) and discrete ordinate radiative transfer model (DISORT) have been used to compute fluxes and cooling rates in scattering atmospheres. RRTM is an approximate model with high arithmetic speed, while LBLRTM-DISORT is a precise model with low arithmetic speed. We compare the RRTM and LBLRTM-DISORT in a spectral region of 0.2-100μm. Specifically, we quantify the RRTM errors when clouds and aerosol (dust aerosol, in particular) are present.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86355", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86357" } }
{"authors":"Rachel Hausmann::Oregon State University--Chris Goldfinger::Oregon State University--Bran Black::Oregon State University--Tim Collins::Portland Water Bureau--Christopher Romsos::Oregon State University--Leonardo Medeiros::UFRN Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte--Mike Mutschler::Seahorse Geomatics--Steve Galer::Oregon State University--Richard Raymond::Environmental Science Resources, LLC--Ann Morey::Oregon State University--", "title":"T31A-2853: Marine and Lacustrine Turbidite Records: Testing Linkages and Estimating Ground Motions, Central Cascadia Margin, USA", "abstract":"We are investigating a potential paleoseismic record at Bull Run Lake, 165 km inland and 280 km landward of the tip of the plate boundary thrust, at the latitude of Portland, Oregon, central Cascadia margin. Bull Run is a landslide dammed lake in a cirque basin on the western flanks of Mt. Hood. Bull Run is potentially a good paleoseismic site, with no major stream inputs and a small catchment basin. The watershed and lake are faulted, and may contain ashes and evidence of crustal faulting. The lake was investigated by Raymond (1983), who cored the lake and found an orderly stratigraphic sequence with a number of minerogenic disturbance events (turbidites) and the Mazama Ash.  The bulk ages of several of the disturbance events dated in Raymond’s cores overlap well-known Cascadia earthquakes, including the AD 1700 event and several prior earthquakes, suggesting potential for this site. We collected full coverage high-resolution multibeam and backscatter data, along with a high resolution grid of CHIRP sub-bottom profiles, and seven new sediment gravity cores. We find that the turbidite record in the lake is well imaged in the high-resolution chirp data, and is found throughout the lake, including at least one basin isolated from the main basin. The continuity of the turbidite record shows little or no relationship to the minor stream inlets, suggesting the disturbance beds are not likely to be storm related. Many faint laminae may contain a storm record. Subtle channels from north and south sides of the lake feed an axial channel that terminates at the eastern shore. Lake sidewall failures are evident on the north and south walls, and occur with and without imageable tabular blocky slide debris where sedimented slopes exceed ~ 22-25 deg. Smaller failures visible in backscatter data are found on slopes as low as 12 degrees. We conducted diver investigations of several of the landslide areas, collecting hand push core samples and in-situ vane shear torquemeter measurements. Initial slope stability models suggest that slopes less than ~ 25 degrees are statically stable. We are investigating the levels of ground motion required to destabilize surface sediments around the lake, and radiocarbon dating the disturbance events for comparison to other paleoseismic records, including new offshore cores at a similar latitude.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86357", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86358" } }
{"authors":"Xiaofan Yang::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Timothy Scheibe::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Xingyuan Chen::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Glenn Hammond::Sandia National Laboratories--Xuehang Song::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--", "title":"H23F-1646: Hybrid Multiscale Simulation of Hydrologic and Biogeochemical Processes in the River-Groundwater Interaction Zone", "abstract":"The zone in which river water and groundwater mix plays an important role in natural ecosystems as it regulates the mixing of nutrients that control biogeochemical transformations. Subsurface heterogeneity leads to local hotspots of microbial activity that are important to system function yet difficult to resolve computationally. To address this challenge, we are testing a hybrid multiscale approach that couples models at two distinct scales, based on field research at the U. S. Department of Energy’s Hanford Site. The region of interest is a 400 x 400 x 20 m macroscale domain that intersects the aquifer and the river and contains a contaminant plume. However, biogeochemical activity is high in a thin zone (mud layer, <1 m thick) immediately adjacent to the river. This microscale domain is highly heterogeneous and requires fine spatial resolution to adequately represent the effects of local mixing on reactions. It is not computationally feasible to resolve the full macroscale domain at the fine resolution needed in the mud layer, and the reaction network needed in the mud layer is much more complex than that needed in the rest of the macroscale domain. Hence, a hybrid multiscale approach is used to efficiently and accurately predict flow and reactive transport at both scales. In our simulations, models at both scales are simulated using the PFLOTRAN code. Multiple microscale simulations in dynamically defined sub-domains (fine resolution, complex reaction network) are executed and coupled with a macroscale simulation over the entire domain (coarse resolution, simpler reaction network). The objectives of the research include: 1) comparing accuracy and computing cost of the hybrid multiscale simulation with a single-scale simulation; 2) identifying hot spots of microbial activity; and 3) defining macroscopic quantities such as fluxes, residence times and effective reaction rates.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86358", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86359" } }
{"authors":"Peyruz Gasimov::University of Wyoming--", "title":"H31B-1418: PLIF and PTV studies of solute transport in a single fracture replica", "abstract":"A Bentheimer sandstone core sample with a stress-induced fracture was scanned with a micro-CT scanner to obtain fracture topology map, which was then used to manufacture a transparent hard PDMS replica. A medium-fluid system combination with matched refractive indices was used to conduct successive Planar Laser-Induced Fluorescence (PLIF) and Particle Tracking Velocimetry (PTV) measurements of solute transport at steady-state conditions. We map velocity fields under single-phase flow conditions with and without trapped non-wetting phase globules being present. The raw PTV data was averaged and arranged in a uniform mesh (Eulerian framework). We then used the mesh to simulate the solute transport using Markovian Random Walk technique. Taylor dispersion as well as Gelhar macrodispersion analyses are also presented. The simulation results are compared with their experimental counterparts.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86359", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86360" } }
{"authors":"Camille Sultana::University of California San Diego--Kimberly Prather::University of California San Diego--Robin Richardson::--Xiaofei Wang::University of California San Diego--", "title":"A43C-0297: Resolving Changing Chemical and Physical Properties of SSA Particle Types during Laboratory Phytoplankton Blooms using Online Single Particle Analysis", "abstract":"Changes in the chemical composition of sea spray aerosols (SSA) can modify their climate-relevant properties. Recent studies have shown a diverse set of distinct SSA particle types, however there are conflicting reports on how and whether biological activity controls the organic fraction and mixing state of SSA. This study leverages an aerosol time-of-flight mass spectrometer to give an accounting of the temporally resolved mixing state of primary SSA (0.4 – 3 µm vacuum aerodynamic diameter), encompassing 97% of particles detected over the course of laboratory phytoplankton blooms. The influence of biological activity on the climate relevant properties of defined particle types is also investigated. Spatial chemical particle heterogeneity and particularly the surface chemical composition of particles are described along with particle type specific water-particle interactions. These online measurements in tandem with chemical composition could give new insight on the link between seawater chemistry, marine aerosols, and climate properties.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86360", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86361" } }
{"authors":"Gregory Hoke::Syracuse University--Devin McPhillips::Syracuse University--Laura Giambiagi::International Council for Science--Carmala Garzione::University of Rochester--J Mahoney::Univ Wisconsin--Manfred Strecker::University of Potsdam--", "title":"T34A-05: Marked spatial gradient in the topographic evolution of the Andes spanning the Chilean flat-slab transition: evidence from stable isotope paleoaltimetry and zircon double dating", "abstract":"The major changes in the subduction angle of the Nazca plate are often hypothesized to have important consequences for the tectonic evolution of the Andes. Temporal and spatial patterns of topographic growth and exhumation are indicators that should help elucidate any linkages to subduction angle. Here, we combine observations from stable isotope paleoaltimetry with detrital zircon double dating between 30 and 35°S to demonstrate a consistent increase in surface and rock uplift in the Andes south of 32°S. The stable isotope data are from Miocene pedogenic carbonates collected from seven different basin sequences spanning different tectonic and topographic positions in the range. Paleoelevations between 1 km and 1.9 km are calculated using modern local isotope-elevation gradients along with carbonate-formation temperatures determined from clumped isotope studies in modern soils. Present day, low elevation foreland localities were at their present elevations during the Miocene, while three of the intermontane basins experienced up to 2 km of surface uplift between the end of deposition during the late Miocene and present. Detrital zircon (U-Th-Sm)/He and U-Pb double dating in three modern drainage basins (Tunuyán, Arroyo Grande and Río de los Patos) reveals clear Miocene exhumation signals south of the flat slab with no recent exhumation apparent at 32°S. The exhumation pattern is consistent with paleoaltimetry results. Interestingly, the maximum inferred surface uplift is greatest where the crust is thinnest, and the timing of the observed changes in elevation and exhumation has not been linked to any documented episodes of large-magnitude crustal shortening in the eastern half of the range. The spatial pattern of surface uplift and exhumation seems to mimic the Pampean flat slab’s geometry, however, it could be equally well explained by eastward migration of a crustal root via ductile deformation in the lower crust and is not related to flat-slab subduction.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86361", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86362" } }
{"authors":"Mehmet Odman::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--Yongtao Hu::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--Armistead Russell::Georgia Inst Technology--", "title":"A14A-06: Interactions of wildland fire emissions with power plant and traffic emissions in Southeastern US", "abstract":"Emissions from wildland fires are a significant source of air pollutants and in certain parts of the world where air quality is already stressed by anthropogenic emissions they can lead to major health and environmental problems. The harmful effects can come simply from the increase of the preexisting primary pollutants in the region by the wildland fire emissions. Moreover, secondary pollutants can also form when wildland fire emissions coexist with emissions from other sources such as power plants and highways. In Southeastern US, where prescribed burning is routinely practiced both for ecosystem health and reduction of wildfire risk, smoke plumes from wildland fires frequently encroach urban areas where there is an abundance of other emissions. Up till now, assessments of the impacts of prescribed burning mostly focused on the primary pollutants and the interactions of wildland fire emissions with anthropogenic emissions has not been studied in detail. Since November 2014, we have been forecasting the individual air quality impacts of two anthropogenic emission categories, namely electric generation and vehicular traffic, as well as prescribed burning using the Decoupled Direct Method (DDM) available in CMAQ version 5.0.2. We use special techniques to provide accurate emissions inputs to our forecasts, including a new weather-based prescribed burn forecasting system that mines a burn permit database for geographic burning patterns. We also use surface and satellite observations along with simulated concentrations and their sensitivities to emissions in an inverse modeling framework to continuously adjust input emissions. The impact forecasts include the interactions between emissions from different sources but do not distinguish their magnitudes. In this study, using our forecasting system we simulated the impacts of power plants and on-road vehicles on ozone and PM2.5 concentrations first with and then without the prescribed burn emissions. Then, we attributed the difference between the two sets of simulated impacts to the interactions between the wildland fires and the two anthropogenic emissions categories. Results for periods of large prescribed burn impacts in urban areas during the 2015 burning season will be presented to establish bounds on potential interactions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86362", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86363" } }
{"authors":"Juan Martínez-Sykora::LMSAL--", "title":"Fourier Analysis Accelereated with GPUs on 3D Numerical Simulations of the Solar Atmosphere.", "abstract":"Solar dynamics from the convection zone create a variety of waves that may propagate through the solar atmosphere. These waves are important in facilitating the energy transfer between the sun’s surface and the corona as well as propagating energy throughout the solar system. How and where these waves are dissipated remains an open question. Advanced 3D Radiative-Magneticohydrodynamic numerical simulations have furthered our understanding of the processes involved. Fourier transformations analysis helps to understand the nature of the waves by finding the frequency and wavelength of these waves, as well as the nature of their propagation and where they get dissipated. In order to analyze the waves in the aforementioned simulations and models, Fast Fourier Transform algorithms will be applied. Since the processing of the Furier transform over the large 3D domains of the simulations would be time intensive and inefficient on a single processor (CPU), CUDA, a computing architecture that harnesses the power of the Graphycs Procesor Units (GPUs), will be used to accelerate the calculations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86363", "section":""} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86364" } }
{"authors":"Anne Jensen::UMIAQ, LLC--", "title":"PA31D-05: Completed Experiments in Human Adaptation: Roles for Social Science in Arctic Policy Development", "abstract":"The Arctic contains many sites with exquisite organic preservation, which can be used to inform policy decisions in two very different ways. Archaeological sites can be considered at the result of completed experiments in human adaptation. With proper analysis of the multiple types of data they contain, one can see how climate change affected arctic ecosystems (including the human components) and how successful human responses were. Secondly, archaeological finds can provide vivid illustrations of the effects of climate change effects and extreme climatic events at a particular place. These illustrations appear to be far easier for members of the public to relate to than other means of transmitting scientific information, and can be good means of motivating people to be proactive.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86364", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86365" } }
{"authors":"Christian Koyama::Tohoku University--Honghua Wang::Central South University--Tseedulam Khuut::Mongolian University of Science and Technology--Takayuki Kawai::Niigata University--Motoyuki Sato::Tohoku University--", "title":"H11A-1319: Robust quantitative parameter estimation by advanced CMP measurements for vadose zone hydrological studies", "abstract":"Soil moisture plays a crucial role in the understanding of processes in the vadose zone hydrology. In the last two decades ground penetrating radar (GPR) has been widely discussed has nondestructive measurement technique for soil moisture data. Especially the common mid-point (CMP) technique, which has been used in both seismic and GPR surveys to investigate the vertical velocity profiles, has a very high potential for quantitaive obervsations from the root zone to the ground water aquifer. However, the use is still rather limited today and algorithms for robust quantitative paramter estimation are lacking. In this study we develop an advanced processing scheme for operational soil moisture reetrieval at various depth. Using improved signal processing, together with a semblance - non-normalized cross-correlation sum combined stacking approach and the Dix formula, the interval velocities for multiple soil layers are obtained from the RMS velocities allowing for more accurate estimation of the permittivity at the reflecting point. Where the presence of a water saturated layer, like a groundwater aquifer, can be easily identified by its RMS velocity due to the high contrast compared to the unsaturated zone. By using a new semi-automated measurement technique the acquisition time for a full CMP gather with 1 cm intervals along a 10 m profile can be reduced significantly to under 2 minutes. The method is tested and validated under laboratory conditions in a sand-pit as well as on agricultural fields and beach sand in the Sendai city area. Comparison between CMP estimates and TDR measurements yield a very good agreement with RMSE of 1.5 Vol.-%. The accuracy of depth estimation is validated with errors smaller than 2%. Finally, we demonstrate application of the method in a test site in semi-arid Mongolia, namely the Orkhon River catchment in Bulgan, using commercial 100 MHz and 500 MHz RAMAC GPR antennas. The results demonstrate the suitability of the proposed method for advanced operational vadose zone research.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86365", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86366" } }
{"authors":"Ning Qiu::SCSIO South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Acaademy of Sciences--", "title":"T51F-2972: Geophysical Investigations of Crustal Structure of Cenozoic Rifting Basin in Passive Continental Margin: The Pearl River Mouth Basin, South China Sea", "abstract":"The Pearl River Mouth Basin (PRMB) initiated in the Cenozoic with rifting, and became a part of the South China Sea (SCS) rifted passive continental margin. Decades of industrial exploration in this proliferous region have produced lots of geological and geophysical data. In order to get the first order crustal scale structure, we integrate well data, multi channel seismic reflection, and the observed gravity field for a joint inversion. The Cenozoic sediment of PRMB comprises of several stratigraphic sequences, including the terrestrial facies, the marine facies and the transitional facies. The sedimentary model takes into account of two main parts that refer to the Paleogene to Neogene unit and the Neogene to Quaternary unit, which were respectively formed during the intercontinental rifting stage and the passive continental margin post-rifting stage. By integrating long cable seismic profiles, interval velocity and performing gravity modelling, we have modelled the sub-sedimentary basement. There are some high-density bodies in the lower part of crust (ρ> 2.8 g/cm3), most of which were probably made up by emplacement from the upper mantle into the lower crust. The crystalline continental crust spans from unstretched domains (as thick as about 25 km) near the continental shelf to extremely thinned domains (of less than 6 km thickness) in the sag center. The presented crust-scale structural model shows that the crystalline crust of the Liwan Sag (LWS) and Baiyun sag (BYS) are thinner than other parts of PRMB, especially, the crystalline crust thickness in BYS is even less than 6 km. we could preliminary infer that the crystalline crust may be more easily stretched and be thinned by the existence of hot and soft substances at the lower crust.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86366", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86367" } }
{"authors":"Chelsea Preble::University of California Berkeley--Timothy Dallmann::Carnegie Mellon University--Nathan Kreisberg::Aerosol Dynamics Inc.--Susanne Hering::Aerosol Dynamics Inc.--Robert Harley::University of California Berkeley--Thomas Kirchstetter::UC Berkeley--", "title":"A11M-0232: Effects of After-Treatment Control Technologies on Heavy-Duty Diesel Truck Emissions", "abstract":"Diesel engines are major emitters of nitrogen oxides (NOx) and the black carbon (BC) fraction of particulate matter (PM). Diesel particle filter (DPF) and selective catalytic reduction (SCR) emission control systems that target exhaust PM and NOx have recently become standard on new heavy-duty diesel trucks (HDDT). There is concern that DPFs may increase ultrafine particle (UFP) and total particle number (PN) emissions while reducing PM mass emissions. Also, the deliberate catalytic oxidation of engine-out NO to NO2 in continuously regenerating DPFs may lead to increased tailpipe emission of NO2 and near-roadway concentrations that exceed the 1-hr national ambient air quality standard. Increased NO2 emissions can also promote formation of ozone and secondary PM. We report results from ongoing on-road studies of HDDT emissions at the Port of Oakland and the Caldecott Tunnel in California’s San Francisco Bay Area. Emission factors (g pollutant per kg diesel) were linked via recorded license plates to each truck’s engine model year and installed emission controls. At both sites, DPF use significantly increased the NO2/NOx emission ratio. DPFs also significantly increased NO2 emissions when installed as retrofits on older trucks with higher baseline NOx emissions. While SCR systems on new trucks effectively reduce total NOx emissions and mitigate these undesirable DPF-related NO2 emissions, they also lead to significant emission of N2O, a potent greenhouse gas. When expressed on a CO2-equivalent basis, the N2O emissions increase offsets the fuel economy gain (i.e., the CO2 emission reduction) associated with SCR use. At the Port, average NOx, BC and PN emission factors from new trucks equipped with DPF and SCR were 69 ± 15%, 92 ± 32% and 66 ± 35% lower, respectively, than modern trucks without these emission controls. In contrast, at the Tunnel, PN emissions from older trucks retrofit with DPFs were ~2 times greater than modern trucks without DPFs. The difference could be related to engine temperature, with highway operation producing greater exhaust temperatures that promote UFP nucleation. These studies indicate that DPF and SCR use can mitigate air quality and climate impacts of diesel truck emissions through reductions in BC and NOx. However, increased emissions of N2O, NO2 and PN may offset some of the benefits.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86367", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86368" } }
{"authors":"Mackenzie Taggart::California Polytechnic State University San Luis Obispo--Irma Caraballo Álvarez::University de Puerto Rico--Chase Mueller::University of Texas at San Antonio--Sherry Palacios::NASA Ames Research Center--Cindy Schmidt::NASA Ames Research Center--Cristina Milesi::NASA Ames Research Center--L Palmer-Moloney::US Army Corps of Engineers Army Geospatial Center--", "title":"H13C-1564: Developing a Resource for Implementing ArcSWAT Using Global Datasets", "abstract":"This project developed a comprehensive user manual outlining methods for adapting and implementing global datasets for use within ArcSWAT for international and worldwide applications. The Soil and Water Assessment Tool (SWAT) is a hydrologic model that looks at a number of hydrologic variables including runoff and the chemical makeup of water at a given location on the Earth's surface using Digital Elevation Models (DEM), land cover, soil, and weather data. However, the application of ArcSWAT for projects outside of the United States is challenging as there is no standard framework for inputting global datasets into ArcSWAT. This project aims to remove this obstacle by outlining methods for adapting and implementing these global datasets via the user manual. The manual takes the user through the processes of data conditioning while providing solutions and suggestions for common errors. The efficacy of the manual was explored using examples from watersheds located in Puerto Rico, Mexico and Western Africa. Each run explored the various options for setting up a ArcSWAT project as well as a range of satellite data products and soil databases. Future work will incorporate in-situ data for validation and calibration of the model and outline additional resources to assist future users in efficiently implementing the model for worldwide applications. The capacity to manage and monitor freshwater availability is of critical importance in both developed and developing countries. As populations grow and climate changes, both the quality and quantity of freshwater are affected resulting in negative impacts on the health of the surrounding population. The use of hydrologic models such as ArcSWAT can help stakeholders and decision makers understand the future impacts of these changes enabling informed and substantiated decisions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86368", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86369" } }
{"authors":"Gift Ntuli::Baylor University--Mohit Agrawal::Baylor University--Jay Pulliam::Baylor University--Victor Huerfano Moreno::University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez--Eugenio Polanco Rivera::Universidad Autónoma de Santo Domingo--", "title":"S23D-2784: Ps receiver function imaging of crustal structure and Moho topography beneath the Northeast Caribbean", "abstract":"Due to its tectonic history, the Caribbean plate contains complex fault systems that are likely to have disrupted the Moho. To study the region's subsurface structure we computed a 3D image of the Northeast Caribbean via “velocity analysis” with Ps receiver functions. In this technique we simultaneously find, via an optimization procedure, depths to major discontinuities (in this case the Moho) and P and S velocity profiles beneath each seismic station. Ps receiver functions are time series computed from three-component seismograms that identify waves converted from P- to S-type at velocity discontinuities, such as the Moho and subducting lithosphere. Data were requested from the IRIS Data Management Center for events that occurred in the 2005-15 time period with magnitudes of 5.5-8.0 and epicentral distances of 30°-95° from stations in the study region. Data pre-processing steps include tapering, removing the trend and mean, and rotating from Z-N-E to L-Q-T (ray-based) coordinate systems. Ps receiver functions were then computed via iterative deconvolution in the time domain and the best receiver functions were stacked and modeled to generate a 3D image of the subsurface. Shear velocity profiles for each station are varied in a procedure, driven by simulated annealing, that seeks to optimize the correlation of a target feature—in this case the Moho—in the set of pre-processed Ps receiver functions. This procedure is feasible only when station spacing is relatively dense, which limits its success in this region to the islands of Puerto Rico and Hispaniola. Individual receiver functions were computed for isolated stations in the NE Caribbean, as well, but velocity analysis is limited to the two islands that have the densest station coverage. Moho depths beneath Puerto Rico range from 24 km, in the north, to 37 km, in the south. Moho depths beneath Hispaniola range from 23 km to 36 km but exhibit a more complex pattern of variation than beneath Puerto Rico, with the Moho generally shallower in the east, deepening in central and western Dominican Republic, and shallowing again in the southwest, although values beneath Haiti are poorly constrained. The interpretation of the images places constraints on the structure of the subsurface and may elucidate the causes and styles of deformation occurring in the region.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86369", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86370" } }
{"authors":"Leonard Ancuta::Lehigh University--Richard Carlson::Carnegie Inst Washington--Dmitri Ionov::University of Montpellier II--", "title":"V51C-3044: Geochronology and Geochemistry of Lower Crustal Xenoliths: Exploring the Formation of the Lower Crust Beneath Central Mongolia", "abstract":"Central Mongolia is far removed from any active margin yet it is marked by the anomalously high Hangay Mountains. Near Tariat on the flanks of the Hangay range we recovered lower crustal xenoliths from the Shavaryn-Tsaram Quaternary basaltic breccia pipe. Two-pyroxene Fe-Mg exchange thermometry indicates the xenoliths equilibrated at 840 ± 30ºC. Previous studies indicated pressure ranges between 12.5 and 15.5 kbar for samples with similar equilibration temperatures from the same locality (Stosch et al., 1995). Abundant zircon in the samples dated by U-Pb laser ablation ICP-MS show a wide range of ages from 50 to 300 Ma with a broad peak around 200 Ma. Each of the seven dated samples shows a similar spread of ages with a maximum age range of 200 Ma for individual xenoliths. The new data suggest that the lower crust in the Tariat area formed in the Late Paleozoic to early Mesozoic during the accretion of the Central Asian Orogenic Belt (CAOB), which is consistent with arc like geochemical signatures of whole-rocks and with common Permo-Triassic Sm-Nd and U-Pb isotope ages for magmatic rocks exposed on the surface in the region. Whether the younger Mesozoic zircon ages reflect later metamorphic events or result from diffusive Pb loss is unclear. Based on elevated Th/U ratios the latter may be more likely, though more work is needed to fully resolve the origin of the zircons. Early Mesozoic whole-rock Sm-Nd model ages for the suite of xenoliths are broadly consistent with the zircon U-Pb data. Stachnik et al. (2014) indicated that the high elevations of the Hangay region could be isostatically supported by a thick crust. Our new data suggests the lower crust, and by inference the high topography, formed in the Late Paleozoic to Early Mesozoic during the formation of the CAOB.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86370", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86371" } }
{"authors":"Herbert Funsten::Los Alamos Natl Laboratory--Kyle Pittman::Los Alamos Natl Laboratory--Priscilla Frisch::University of Chicago--Jacob Heerikhuisen::University of Alabama in Huntsville--Paul Janzen::University of Montana--David McComas::Southwest Research Institute Southwest Research Institute--Daniel Reisenfeld::University of Montana--Nathan Schwadron::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Eric Zirnstein::Southwest Research Institute--", "title":"SH41B-2381: Spectral Modulation of the IBEX Ribbon Flux by the Dynamic Draping of the Interstellar Medium over the Heliosphere", "abstract":"The bright energetic neutral atom (ENA) emission in the circular ribbon observed by the Interstellar Boundary Explorer (IBEX) ribbon is a key ordering parameter of the interaction region between the heliosphere and the insterstellar medium. The ribbon is hypothesized to result from the condition in which the interstellar magnetic field, which is draped over the heliosphere and is the emission location in the ` secondary`  reibbon hypothesis, is oriented perpendicular to the line-of-sight view from IBEX. Here, we consider the relative motion of the draped magnetic field line for modulating ribbon intensity. Using the 0.7 keV and 1.1 keV ENA maps from the IBEX-Hi instrument, we find that this relative motion may significantly contribute to the variation of ribbon flux around the ribbon. We discuss the implications of this relative motion on our understanding the global structure and dynamics of the heliosphere-insterstellar medium interaction.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86371", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86372" } }
{"authors":"Zane Jobe::Shell Houston--Carlos Pirmez::Shell--Zoltan Sylvester::Organization Not Listed--Alessandro Frascati::Shell--Michele Bolla Pittaluga::Shell--Nick Howes::Shell--", "title":"EP12A-02: Vertical and Lateral Changes in Facies, Bed Thickness, and Grain Size in Submarine Channels from an Ultra-High Resolution Dataset, Western Niger Delta Slope: Implications for Turbidity Current Stratification", "abstract":"Modern seafloor and shallow subsurface studies offer a high-resolution view into the morphology, architecture, and evolution of submarine channels. In addition to architecture derived from seismic data, lithologic and age calibration are needed to constrain the evolution of submarine channels and the properties of the flows that sculpt them. Near-seafloor seismic and core data from the western Niger Delta slope allow for the quantification of lateral and vertical changes in facies, bed thickness, and grain size in a well-constrained channel system. The dataset consists of a 3D seismic volume, high-resolution 2D seismic profiles, 21 sediment cores, and more than 500 grain-size analyses. Core and seismic data reveal that the channel axis consists of thick-bedded, amalgamated, coarse-grained sands. Channel margin deposits are thin-bedded and heterolithic, and show a pronounced decrease in bed thickness and grain size with increasing distance above and away from the channel thalweg. Margin deposits exist in ‘scallops’ that correspond to bends of an older, more sinuous channel. While individual scallops are disconnected from each other, beds can be correlated over hundreds of meters between cores within the same scallop. Multiple core transects across the channel demonstrate a rapid decrease in bed thickness and deposition rate (calculated from radiocarbon ages) with increasing height above channel thalweg. Grain size distributions obtained with a laser particle-size analyzer also show a strong fining with height above thalweg. These trends reflect the stratification of grain size and sediment concentration in channelized turbidity currents. Simple theoretical concentration and grain-size profiles match the observed trends, providing constraints for numerical and rule-based modeling approaches. Although facies models for submarine channels often assume quasi-horizontal fill with rapid lateral facies changes, this dataset suggests that there is a significant difference in elevation between coeval axis and margin deposits. The relationships between grain size, bed thickness, and height above channel thalweg can be used to estimate location of deposition relative to the base of the time-equivalent geomorphic channel when only limited data (e.g., core or outcrop) is available.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86372", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86373" } }
{"authors":"Alandra Lopez::Bowdoin College--Grayson Badgley::Stanford University--Christopher Field::Stanford University--", "title":"B11C-0453: Quantitative Nutrient Limitation Analysis of Global Forests by Remote Sensing", "abstract":"Nutrient availability in terrestrial ecosystems may be the primary determinant of the long-term carbon storage capacity of vegetation. Both nutrient availability and carbon storage capacity are highly uncertain and limit our ability to predict atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Terrestrial vegetation, especially forests, play a critical role in regulating the global carbon cycle and Earth’s climate by sequestering carbon from the atmosphere. The broad relationship between nutrient availability and increased biomass production can be captured using remotely-sensed spectral information. We develop an approach to estimate total nutrient availability in 848 global forest sites at 1-km spatial resolution by combining the ecological principle of functional convergence with MODIS gross primary productivity (GPP) and evapotranspiration (ET) products from 2000-2013. Convergence in the relationship between maximum GPP and ET of nutrient-rich forests indicate that any sites deviating from this upper-limit are associated with a lower availability of nutrients. This method offers a way to examine the severity, as well as the spatial extent of nutrient limitation at the global scale. We find that the degree to which forests are nutrient limited range between 0% and 81% with an average limitation of 16 ± 17%. Our method agrees with regional nutrient gradients (i.e. SW-NE Amazon), but does not tightly correspond with recently published nutrient limitation classification standards (Fernandez-Martinez et al., 2014). A global terrestrial nutrient limitation map can assist in diagnosing the health of vegetation while removing the necessity for extensive field sampling or local nutrient addition experiments. Further research will expand the study sites to obtain a complete global terrestrial nutrient limitation map.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86373", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86374" } }
{"authors":"Aaron Barth::Oregon State University--Nicholas Bill::Oregon State University--Peter Clark::Oregon State University--Nicklas Pisias::Coll Oceanic & Atmospheric Sci--", "title":"PP23B-2297: Carbon Isotopic Excursions Associated with the Mid-Pleistocene Transition and the Mid-Brunhes Transition", "abstract":"During the last 2 Myr, the climate system experienced two major transitions in variability: the mid-Pleistocene Transition (MPT), which represents a shift from dominant low-amplitude 41-kyr frequencies to dominant high-amplitude 100-kyr frequencies, and the mid-Brunhes Transition (MBT), which represents an increase in the amplitude of the 100-kyr frequency. While the MPT and MBT are typically identified in the benthic marine δ18O stack, their expression in other components of the climate system is less clear. Pleistocene δ13C records have been used to characterize climate and ocean circulation changes in response to orbital forcing, but these studies have used either a limited number of records or stacked data sets, which have the potential to bias the variability from the large number of young records. Here we present those existing δ13C data sets (n=18) that completely span these transitions. We use empirical orthogonal functions (EOFs) on these continuous data sets rather than stacking, allowing the determination of the dominant modes of variability and characterization of the time-frequency variation during the last 2 Myr. Our results identify two substantial carbon isotopic excursions. The first is a pronounced negative excursion during the MPT (~900 ka, MIS 23) that stands out as the strongest minimum in the last 2 Myr (previously identified from five records by Raymo et al., 1997). Corresponding εNd data from the South Atlantic suggest a strong weakening of the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation through the MIS 23 interglacial associated with this excursion. The second is a robust positive excursion ~530 ka (MIS 13), prior to the MBT (MIS 11), which stands out as the strongest maximum in the last 2 Myr. Possible causes of these excursions will be discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86374", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86375" } }
{"authors":"Congrong Yu::Hohai University--", "title":"C23A-0760: Seasonal Variation of Arsenic Concentrations in Natural Water of the Source Area of the Yellow River on the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau, China", "abstract":"Seasonal variation of Arsenic concentrations in natural water of the Source Area of the Yellow River on the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau, China Congrong Yu[a＊], Lei Wen[a], Xiaoyan Zhong[a] a College of Hydrology and Water Resource in Hohai University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China ＊Email: congrongyu@126.com  Abstract Seasonal variation in the arsenic (As) concentrations of natural water has been studied in the source area of the Yellow River (SAYR) in China. Samples were collected in the lake, river and spring in April and July, 2014. In April the average values of As concentrations in SAYR from high to low are: lake (29.1μg/L, n=17, range 8.6-66.4μg/L) > river (25.0μg/L, n=31, range 6.0-77.1μg/L) > spring (15.7μg/L, n=5, range 12.7-21.6μg/L). In July the same order of the average values of As concentrations in SAYR was found: lake (15.1μg/L, n=17, range 7.3-60.6μg/L) > river (7.3μg/L, n=31, range 3.6-16.3μg/L) > spring (7.5μg/L, n=5, range 6-8.2μg/L). The arsenic concentration in the lake kept the same in both season, but the arsenic in the river and spring decreased remarkably in summer compared with that in winter. It was mainly due to the dilution effect of the precipitation. Because the export arsenic from SAYR in summer (15.4t) are higher than that in winter (14.7t), when the temperature increased, permafrost thawing might contribute to the arsenic flux in the SAYR area. The seasonal variation of arsenic is obvious and further investigation is needed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86375", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86376" } }
{"authors":"Siwei Li::Howard University--Everette Joseph::SUNY at Albany--Qilong Min::State University of New York--", "title":"A41B-0062: Ground-based observations of aerosol-cloud interactions in the North East of the United States", "abstract":"Five years ground-based observations (2006 to 2010) of aerosol and cloud properties derived from passive radiometric sensors deployed at an atmospheric measurement field station in the Baltimore-Washington corridor operated by Howard University were used to examine aerosol indirect effect on cloud optical depth (COD), liquid water path (LWP), cloud droplet effective radius (Re) and cloud droplet number concentration (Nd). A higher frequency of clouds with small Re (<7µm) was found during summer of 2006 and 2007 along with higher frequency of abundant aerosol loading (AOD>0.5). The five-year data are screened for summer boundary layer clouds only and are separated into clean and polluted cases based on aerosol particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter≤2.5µm (PM2.5) value. Evidence of aerosol indirect effect on cloud microphysics is found where for the polluted cases the mean (and median) values of Nd distributions were elevated while the mean (and median) values of Re were decreased as compared to those for the clean cases under various LWP ranges. Relatively, the aerosol indirect effects on modifying cloud microphysical properties are found more significant with large LWP than with small LWP.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86376", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86377" } }
{"authors":"Gifford Wong::Dartmouth College--Erich Osterberg::Dartmouth College--Robert Hawley::Dartmouth College--Zoe Courville::CRREL--David Ferris::Dartmouth College--Jennifer Howley::Dartmouth College--", "title":"C53A-0765: Dynamic Controls on Recent Increases in Northwest Greenland Coastal Precipitation", "abstract":"Arctic precipitation has been rising over recent decades, with implications for glacier mass balance, sea level rise, and thermohaline circulation via the freshening of the Arctic seas. Coastal instrumental data and proxy records in northwest (NW) Greenland indicate positive summer precipitation trends from 1952-2012 along with a long-term, significant (p < 0.05) summer warming trend. While the observed precipitation increase is likely due in part to Clausius-Clapeyron increases in vapor pressure, the dynamical mechanisms responsible for the increasing trend remain poorly understood. Here we use a 61-year record of precipitation from Thule Air Base in NW Greenland and NCEP/NCAR reanalysis data to identify atmospheric circulation patterns associated with enhanced precipitation in recent decades. We evaluate Thule precipitation-circulation relationships for the warm season (July-October [JASO]; 49% of annual precipitation) and cold season (December-February [DJF]; 20% of annual precipitation). Anomalously high precipitation in DJF and JASO is associated with enhanced southerly flow of warm, moist air and enhanced uplift (omega) in Northern Baffin Bay. Meridional flow in Baffin Bay is strongly correlated with the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO). We observe enhanced southerly flow, uplift and Thule precipitation during negative NAO conditions in winter and to a weaker extent JASO. Based on this mechanism, the trend (p < 0.10) of declining annual NAO index values since 1981 is consistent with the rising trends in Thule annual precipitation over this interval. We find evidence that a NW Greenland ice core proxy record (2Barrel) has a diminished JASO seasonal bias compared with the coast, and thus a future, longer proxy record collected from the 2Barrel site would be well suited for capturing both summer and winter climate variability.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86377", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86378" } }
{"authors":"Alex Koiter::University of Northern B.C.--Philip Owens::University of Northern British Columbia--Ellen Petticrew::University of Northern British Columbia--David Lobb::University of Manitoba--", "title":"EP21C-0914: The preferential transport of sediment and its implications for sediment fingerprinting: A flume simulation", "abstract":"The sediment source fingerprinting technique is based on the assumption that the potential sources of sediment can be linked to in-stream sediment by using natural sediment properties as tracers. However, many of the sediment properties used as fingerprints are dependent on both the particle size distribution and organic matter content. The preferential erosion, delivery and transport of sediment within a drainage basin can result in down-stream changes in particle size and organic matter content. Both particle size and organic matter correction factors are commonly used to account for these changes between sources and sediment so that a direct comparison can be made. However, little is known about the potential errors associated with these correction factors. A large outdoor recirculating flume (2 x 2 x 36 m) was used to assess the changes in the physical and biogeochemical properties of fluvially transported sediment under three different channel bed conditions: no gravel (smooth), 5 cm of gravel and 40 cm of gravel. Fine-grained agricultural soil was added to the flume and suspended sediment samples were collected over a 30 hr period. The suspended sediment samples were analyzed for: 1) concentration; 2) particle size distribution; 3) organic matter content; and 4) geochemical composition (51 elements). There was a decrease in both the concentration and median particle size along with an increase in organic matter content over time (distance travelled). The channel bed conditions had an effect on the preferential transport of sediment. Increasing the depth of gravel in the flume resulted in a more rapid and pronounced change in concentration, particle size and organic matter content. The geochemical composition of the sediment changed as a result of fluvial transport but the relation with particle size and organic matter, in terms of the magnitude and direction of the changes, were element specific. This suggests that the use of correction factors needs to be given careful consideration.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86378", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86379" } }
{"authors":"Ian Anderson::University of Vermont--", "title":"H13F-1613: Multivariate Feature Selection for Predicting Scour-Related Bridge Damage using a Genetic Algorithm", "abstract":"Scour and hydraulic damage are the most common cause of bridge failure, reported to be responsible for over 60% of bridge failure nationwide. Scour is a complex process, and is likely an epistatic function of both bridge and stream conditions that are both stationary and in dynamic flux. Bridge inspections, conducted regularly on bridges nationwide, rate bridge health assuming a static stream condition, and typically do not include dynamically changing geomorphological adjustments. The Vermont Agency of Natural Resources stream geomorphic assessment data could add value into the current bridge inspection and scour design. The 2011 bridge damage from Tropical Storm Irene served as a case study for feature selection to improve bridge scour damage prediction in extreme events. The bridge inspection (with over 200 features on more than 300 damaged and 2,000 non-damaged bridges), and the stream geomorphic assessment (with over 300 features on more than 5000 stream reaches) constitute “Big Data”, and together have the potential to generate large numbers of combined features (“epistatic relationships”) that might better predict scour-related bridge damage. The potential combined features pose significant computational challenges for traditional statistical techniques (e.g., multivariate logistic regression). This study uses a genetic algorithm to perform a search of the multivariate feature space to identify epistatic relationships that are indicative of bridge scour damage. The combined features identified could be used to improve bridge scour design, and to better monitor and rate bridge scour vulnerability.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86379", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86380" } }
{"authors":"Yang Zhang::Nanjing University--Yu Nie::Nanjing University Beijing Climate Center, China Meteorological Administration--Gang Chen::Cornell University--Xiu-Qun Yang::Nanjing University--David Burrows::Cornell University--", "title":"A33A-0121: Quantifying barotropic and baroclinic eddy feedbacks in the persistence of the Annular Modes", "abstract":"Understanding the persistence of the Annular Modes is important for the extratropical intraseasonal and decadal predictability. This study introduces a new method to quantify the relative roles of the barotropic and baroclinic eddy feedbacks contributing to the Annular Modes persistence. Through a hybrid Eulerian-Lagrangian Finite Amplitude Wave Activity diagnostic using the ERA-40 and ERA-Interim reanalysis data, it is found that for the Southern Annular Mode (SAM): (i) transient wave activity is important in driving the SAM but provides a negative feedback to the SAM persistence. (ii) Irreversible PV mixing, through barotropic processes in the upper troposphere, plays an important role in driving and sustaining the SAM variability. Particularly, following the poleward shift in the eddy-driven jet, the reduction/enhancement in effective diffusivity on the jet’s poleward/equatorward flank can be understood by a stronger/weaker zonal jet acting as a robust/leaky mixing barrier. (iii) Baroclinic eddy generation and vertical wave propagation mainly act to sustain the anomalous zonal wind in SAM. The diagnostics are also applied to assess the Annular Mode simulations in simplified and comprehensive CMIP5 models to understand the bias of the SAM simulations in numerical models.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86380", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86381" } }
{"authors":"Palak Vasudeva::Utah State University--Colleen Jones::Utah State University--David Powelson::Utah State University--Astrid Jacobson::Utah State University--", "title":"H21D-1410: BORON IN PARIETTE WETLAND SEDIMENTS, AQUATIC VEGETATION & BENTHIC ORGANISMS", "abstract":"The Pariette Wetlands are comprised of 20 ponds located in Utah’s Uintah Basin. Boron concentration in the Pariette Wetlands have been observed to exceed the total maximum daily limit of 750 µg L-1. Considering water flow in and out of the wetlands, boron is accumulating within the wetlands where it is sorbed to sediments and bioconcentrated by wetland plant and macro invertebrates. Since boron is an avian teratogen, an estimate of boron ingestion exposure is warranted. Samples from 3 of the 23 Pariette Wetland ponds with one pond near the inlet, one near the outlet, and one in the middle were collected. Five sampling points were designated along a 100 m transect of each pond. At each sampling point duplicate (or triplicate) samples of water, sediments, benthic organisms and wetland vegetation were collected. The sediments were collected with a KB-corer and divided at depths of 0-2 cm, 2-7 cm, and 7+ cm from the sediment surface. Sample splits were sent to the USU Bug lab for identification of invertebrate species. Whenever this transect was not intercepting vegetation, 2-3 additional sample sites were identified at the pond within stands of representative vegetation where bird nests are located. The plant parts used for boron analyses will include seeds, shoot and roots of vascular plants, as well as algae or duckweeds skimmed from the surface. Samples were processed within 2 days of collection. Water samples filtered through a 0.45 µ membrane filter were analyzed for DOC, pH and ECe. The dried and washed vegetation samples were ground and stored. The benthic organisms and macro invertebrates were netted at the water surface. The dried samples were weighed, ground and stored. Samples were weighed, oven dried and reweighed. For plant and macro-invertebrate samples, a nitric and hydrogen peroxide digestion procedure is used to dissolve environmentally available elements. The Hot Water extraction and DTPA-Sorbitol extraction were compared to estimate wetland plant available boron in the sediments. Boron in water, soil/sediment extracts and digested plant materials was analyzed by Azomethine-H colorimetric method. Additional Sample Characterization Analyses were conducted to interpret results and explain differences in the fate of boron among the sample sites.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86381", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86382" } }
{"authors":"Tatiana Niembro::Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico--Alejandro Lara::Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico--Alejandro Raga::Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico--Ricardo González::Instituto de Radioastronomía y Astrofísica, UNAM--", "title":"SH53A-2464: Radio emission before, during and after the interaction between two coronal mass ejections in the interplanetary medium", "abstract":"We present a study of representative cases of interaction between two coronal mass ejection traveling into the interplanetary medium and directed towards the Earth. With a numerical model we obtained the density as function of the heliospheric distance and we estimated the radio wave frequencies expected before, during and after the collision of each of the structures related to the interaction. We improved our numerical model to distinguish the plasma of each ICME, before, during and after the collision. During the process a discontinuity is formed and we study its evolution till it reaches the Earth at 1 AU. We compared our results with the low frequency radio emissions observed by WIND/WAVES.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86382", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86383" } }
{"authors":"Jennifer Palermo::California State University Fullerton--Matthew Kirby::California State University Fullerton--", "title":"PP13B-2277: A 1300 Year Sub-Decadally Resolved Hydrologic Record from the Coastal Southwestern United States (Crystal Lake, CA)", "abstract":"This study presents a 1300 year sub-decadally resolved record of hydrologic variability from coastal southwestern United States (Crystal Lake, CA). Crystal Lake is a small (0.02 km2), alpine landslide dammed lake in the Angeles National Forest of the San Gabriel Mountains. The hydrologically closed lake is the only permanent, freshwater lake in the range; its catchment is small (0.77 km2). In May 2014, lake depth measured 5.5 m, however the spillover point in the southeastern end of the lake indicates a max depth of ~50 m. Two Livingston piston cores were taken in May 2014, 15 m apart in the lake’s depocenter. Magnetic susceptibility, LOI 550 °C and 950 °C, and grain size were measured at 1 cm contiguous intervals; C:N ratios and C and N isotopic analyses were measured every 2 cm. In addition, representative allochthonous and autochthonous vegetation were collected within the drainage basin for δ13Corg values. An age model was generated using Bacon v2.2, based on 11 AMS 14C dates of discrete organic matter (i.e. charcoal or wood). Age control for the past 200 years is based on correlation to Rothenberg et al. (2010) core ages. Initial results suggest a history of event sedimentation (large storms) superimposed on multi-decadal to centennial hydrologic changes (wet vs. dry periods) such as the Little Ice Age and the Medieval Climate Anomaly. Additionally, the Crystal Lake record is compared to preexisting regional records to further explore the record’s spatial coherence. Mechanisms driving these hydrologic shifts are explored.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86383", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86384" } }
{"authors":"Nobuo Takai::Hokkaido University--Michiko Shigefuji::Institute of Seismology and Volcanology, Hokkaido University--Sudhir Rajaure::Tribuvan University--Subeg Bijukchhen::Hokkaido University--Masayoshi Ichiyanagi::Institute of Seismology and Volcanology, Hokkaido University--Megh Dhital::Tribuvan University--Tsutomu Sasatani::Hokkaido University--", "title":"S43D-2839: Near Fault Strong Ground Motion Records in the Kathmandu Valley during the 2015 Gorkha Nepal Earthquake", "abstract":"Kathmandu is the capital of Nepal and is located in the Kathmandu Valley, which is formed by soft lake sediments of Plio-Pleistocene origin. Large earthquakes in the past have caused significant damage as the seismic waves were amplified in the soft sediments. To understand the site effect of the valley structure, we installed continuous recording accelerometers in four different parts of the valley. Four stations were installed along a west-to-east profile of the valley at KTP (Kirtipur; hill top), TVU (Kirtipur; hill side), PTN (Patan) and THM (Thimi). On 25 April 2015, a large interplate earthquake Mw 7.8 occurred in the Himalayan Range of Nepal. The focal area estimated was about 200 km long and 150 km wide, with a large slip area under the Kathmandu Valley where our strong motion observation stations were installed. The strong ground motions were observed during this large damaging earthquake. The maximum horizontal peak ground acceleration at the rock site was 271 cm s-2, and the maximum horizontal peak ground velocity at the sediment sites reached 112 cm s-1. We compared these values with the empirical attenuation formula for strong ground motions. We found the peak accelerations were smaller and the peak velocities were approximately the same as the predicted values. The rock site KTP motions are less affected by site amplification and were analysed further. The horizontal components were rotated to the fault normal (N205E) and fault parallel (N115E) directions using the USGS fault model. The velocity waveforms at KTP showed about 5 s triangular pulses on the N205E and the up-down components; however the N115E component was not a triangular pulse but one cycle sinusoidal wave. The velocity waveforms at KTP were integrated to derive the displacement waveforms. The derived displacements at KTP are characterized by a monotonic step on the N205E normal and up-down components. The displacement waveforms of KTP show permanent displacements of 130 cm in the fault normal direction and 60 cm in the upward direction; the vector sum of these is 143 cm. Inside the Kathmandu Valley, 147 cm deformation and the same moving direction as the USGS fault normal direction were reported using with GPS data. Our results derived from the KTP records are consistent with these observations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86384", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86385" } }
{"authors":"Leslie Rogers::University of California Berkeley University of Chicago--", "title":"DI43A-2601: How Many Exoplanets Does it Take to Constrain the Origin of Mercury?", "abstract":"The origin of Mercury’s enhanced iron content is a matter of ongoing debate. The characterization of rocky exoplanets promises to provide new independent insights on this topic, by constraining the occurrence rate, physical, and orbital properties of iron-enhanced planets orbiting distant stars. The ultra-short-period transiting planet candidate KOI-1843.03 (0.6 Earth-radius, 4.245 hour orbital period) represents the first exo-Mercury planet candidate ever identified. For KOI-1843.03 to have avoided tidal disruption on such a short orbit, it must have a mean density of at least 7g/cc and be at least as iron rich as Mercury (Rappaport et al. 2013). In contrast, Dressing et al. (2015) have noted that, to date, all confirmed transiting small (< 1.6 Earth-radius) exoplanets with masses measured to better than 20% precision have mean densities that are consistent with Earth-like bulk compositions, though significant compositional dispersion is also admitted within the observational uncertainties. This presentation will describe the application of hierarchical Bayesian models to constrain the underlying distribution of rocky exoplanet iron contents from a sample of noisy mass-radius measurements coupled to rocky planet interior structure models. In addition to deriving constraints on the distribution of iron-enhanced exo-Mercuries from the exoplanet mass-radius measurements in hand, we also apply this approach to simulated data sets to predict how the constraints should improve as increasing numbers of exoplanets are characterized. The work outlines an observational pathway toward using exoplanets to place Mercury into context.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86385", "section":"Earth's Deep Interior"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86386" } }
{"authors":"Olga Gutynska::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--David Sibeck::NASA/GSFC--Mei-Ching Fok::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--", "title":"SM41E-2546: Multipoint Observations of Magnetospheric Processes Relevant to the Substorm Events", "abstract":"We present several case studies of simultaneous multipoint observations of hot ion (~30-2200 keV) injections that occur during substorms in the day- and night-side of magnetosphere from THEMIS, RBSP and MMS probes. We complement them with observations of magnetic field signatures to estimate time delays of earthward plasma flows at multiple probes. We discuss the mechanisms that trigger substorm onset comparing the observations with inner plasma sheet simulations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86386", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86387" } }
{"authors":"Guofeng Cao::Texas Tech University--", "title":"H44B-08: A High Performance Bayesian Computing Framework for Spatiotemporal Uncertainty Modeling", "abstract":"All types of spatiotemporal measurements are subject to uncertainty. With  spatiotemporal data becomes increasingly involved in scientific research  and decision making, it is important to appropriately model the impact of  uncertainty. Quantitatively modeling spatiotemporal uncertainty, however,  is a challenging problem considering the complex dependence and data heterogeneities. State-space models provide a unifying and intuitive framework for  dynamic systems modeling. In this paper, we aim to  extend the conventional state-space models for uncertainty modeling in  space-time contexts while accounting for spatiotemporal effects and data  heterogeneities. Gaussian Markov Random Field (GMRF) models, also known  as conditional autoregressive models, are arguably the most commonly  used methods for modeling of spatially dependent data. GMRF models  basically assume that a geo-referenced variable primarily depends on its  neighborhood (Markov property), and the spatial dependence structure  is described via a precision matrix. Recent study has shown that GMRFs  are efficient approximation to the commonly used Gaussian fields (e.g.,  Kriging), and compared with Gaussian fields, GMRFs enjoy a series of  appealing features, such as fast computation and easily accounting for  heterogeneities in spatial data (e.g, point and areal). This paper  represents each spatial dataset as a GMRF and integrates them into a  state-space form to statistically model the temporal dynamics. Different  types of spatial measurements (e.g., categorical, count or continuous),  can be accounted for by according link functions. A fast alternative to  MCMC framework, so-called Integrated Nested Laplace Approximation (INLA),  was adopted for model inference. Preliminary case studies will be conducted to showcase the advantages  of the described framework. In the first case, we apply the proposed  method for modeling the water table elevation of Ogallala aquifer  over the past decades. In the second case, we analyze the drought  impacts in Texas counties in the past years, where the spatiotemporal  dynamics are represented in areal data.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86387", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86388" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"OS53B-2021: Air-Sea CO2 fluxes and NEP changes in a Baja California Coastal Lagoon during the anomalous North Pacific warm condition in 2014", "abstract":"The present study examines the temporal variability of seawater carbonate chemistry and air-sea CO2 fluxes (FCO2) in a Baja California Mediterranean-climate coastal lagoon. This study was carried out from Nov-2013 to Nov-2014, a period in which anomalous warm conditions were present in the North Pacific Ocean influenced the local oceanography in the adjacent coastal waters off Baja California. These ocean conditions resulted on a negative anomaly of upwelling index, which led to summer-like season (weak upwelling condition) that could be observed in the response of carbon dynamics and metabolic status in San Quintín Bay. Minor changes in dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) concentration during spring months (~100 µmol kg-1) where observed and were associated to biological processes within the lagoon. High DIC (~2200 µmol kg-1), pCO2 (~800 μatm), and minimum pH (~7.8) values were observed in summer, reflecting the predominance of respiration processes apparently mostly linked to the remineralization of sedimentary organic matter supplied from macroalgal blooms. San Quintín Bay acted as a weak source of CO2 to the atmosphere during the study period, with maximum value observed in July (~10 mmol C m-2 d-1). Temporal biomass production of macroalgae contributed to about 50% of total FCO2 estimated in spring-summer seasons, that was a potencial internal source of organic matter to fuel respiration processes in San Quintín Bay. Eelgrass metabolism contributes in a lower degree in total FCO2. During the anomalous ocean conditions in 2014, the lagoon switched seasonally between net heterotrophy and net autotrophy during the study period, where photosynthesis and respiration processes in the lagoon were closer to a balance. Whole-system metabolism and FCO2 clearly indicated the strong dependence of San Quintín Bay on upwelling conditions and benthic metabolism activity, which was mainly controlled by dominant primary producer communities.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86388", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86389" } }
{"authors":"Hongyi Li::Chinese Academy of Sciences--", "title":"C33A-0806: Distributed calibrating snow models using remotely sensed snow cover information", "abstract":"Distributed calibrating snow models using remotely sensed snow cover information Hongyi Li1, Tao Che1, Xin Li1, Jian Wang1 1. Cold and Arid Regions Environmental and Engineering Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, China For improving the simulation accuracy of snow model, remotely sensed snow cover data are used to calibrate spatial parameters of snow model. A physically based snow model is developed and snow parameters including snow surface roughness, new snow density and critical threshold temperature distinguishing snowfall from precipitation, are spatially calibrated in this study. The study region, Babaohe basin, located in northwestern China, have seasonal snow cover and with complex terrain. The results indicates that the spatially calibration of snow model parameters make the simulation results more reasonable, and the simulated snow accumulation days, plot-scale snow depth are more better than lumped calibration.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86389", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86390" } }
{"authors":"Christopher Tasich::Vanderbilt University--Jonathan Gilligan::Vanderbilt University--Steven Goodbred::Vanderbilt-Earth & Envir Scies--Carol Wilson::Louisiana State University--Richard Hale::Vanderbilt University--Leslie Wallace Auerbach::Vanderbilt University--", "title":"GC43G-04: Rejuvenating Poldered Landscapes: A Numerical Model of Elevation Equilibrium in Coastal Bangladesh", "abstract":"The low-lying, coastal region of Bangladesh has relied on poldering (surrounding islands and flood-prone areas with embankments) since the 1960s to mitigate flooding and tidal inundation. The result has been an increase in total arable land and the ability to sustain food production for one of the most densely populated countries in the world. However, poldering has had the unintended consequences of starving embanked landscapes of sediment. To mitigate the effects of subsiding interiors, some poldered communities have used tidal river management (TRM) to allow water and sediment exchange between the polders and the tidal network. Anecdotal reports claim great success in some locations, but not in others. To date, there has been very little quantitative analysis. Here, we use a simple numerical model of tidal inundation and subsequent sediment accretion to examine the potential impacts of TRM at a poldered island, Polder 32 (P32), and the adjacent mangrove forest in southwest Bangladesh. Our model employs mass balance with variable incoming suspended sediment concentration (SSC). We use tidal gauge and SSC data as inputs and test the model against measured accretion values at P32. Sensitivity analysis of model parameters narrows the range of realistic parameter inputs. Preliminary results suggest that it would take ~10-20 years for P32 to re-equilibrate to the natural surrounding land elevations with a restored direct tidal channel connection. Since a direct tidal channel connection is unfeasible and would displace the local population, future work will attempt to constrain time frames for inundation to more closely model TRM efforts. We also plan to add a bedload component and multidimensionality. The present model provides a simple framework for understanding sediment accretion in southwest Bangladesh and helps generate more complex questions about making the delta more sustainable in the face of sea level rise and population growth.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86390", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86392" } }
{"authors":"Supria Paul::Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology--Akm Islam::Bangladesh Institute of Water and Flood Management--M. Alfi Hasan::University of Rhode Island--", "title":"H13C-1565: Sensitivity of Different Satellites Gridded data over Brahmaputra Basin by using Soil and Water Assessment Tool (SWAT)", "abstract":"More than half a billion people of India, China, Nepal, Bangladesh and Bhutan are directly or indirectly dependent on the water resources of the Brahmaputrariver. With climatic and anthropogenic change of this basin region is becoming a cause of concern for future water management and sharing with transboundary riparian nations. To address such issues, robust watershed runoff modeling of the basin is essential. Soil and Water Assessment Tool (SWAT) is a widely used semi-distributed watershed model that is capable of analyzing surface runoff, stream flow, water yield,sediment and nutrienttransport in a large river basin such as Brahmaputra, but the performance of runoff the model depends on the accuracy of input precipitation datasets. But for a transboundary basin like Brahmaputra, precipitation gauge data from upstream areas is either not available or not accessible to the scientific communities.Satellite rainfall products are very effective where radar datasets are absent and conventional rain gauges are sparse. However, the sensitivity of the SWAT model to different satellite data products as well as hydrologic parameters for the Brahmaputra Basin are largely unknown. Thus in this study, a comparative analysis with different satellite data product has been made to assess the runoff using SWAT model. Here, data from three sources: TRMM, APHRDOTIE and GPCP were used as input precipitation satellite data set and ERA-Interim was used as input temperature dataset from 1998 to 2009. The main methods used in modeling the hydrologic processes in SWAT were curve number method for runoff estimating, Penman-Monteith method for PET and Muskingum method for channel routing. Our preliminary results have revealed thatthe TRMM data product is more accurate than APHRODITE and GPCP for runoff analysis. The coefficient of determination (R2) and Nash-Sutcliffe efficiencies for both calibration and validation period from TRMM data are 0.83 and 0.72, respectively.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86392", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86393" } }
{"authors":"Jacky Tran::Pomona College--", "title":"GC11E-1075: Exploring Geochemical Markers of the Anthropocene in River Sediments: Southern New England ", "abstract":"The sedimentary record of New England is complex. From glacial till to colonial land use to the industrial revolution, any sediment preserved is intertwined and muddled by humans. Recent studies support the idea that any anthropogenic markers in the sediment record are site specific. Southern New England is marked by a myriad of practices including farming, charcoal kilns, hatting, mill dams, and iron furnaces. While specific markers of the anthropocene have been identified, little work has been done to correlate and quantify these noted markers across multiple basins. Specifically, a combination of x-ray fluorescence (XRF), x-ray diffraction (XRD), and grain size analysis were done on sediment cores taken within Southern New England across various watersheds. We present a combination of geochemical analysis and detrital zircon geochronology in order identify and account for basin differences. This in turn results in a more comprehensive trans-basin understanding of the anthropocene in this region. We observe strong evidence that supports the idea of geochemical markers anthropocene which include an increase in Mercury and Lead content in the sediments. Additionally, in basins where mill dams are present we observe sediment records consistent with flood events and dam degradation. While still fairly novel and understudied, our results provide insight to the much often question topic of the anthropocene in relation to this particular region and the potential pitfalls of doing large scale anthropogenic dating. ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86393", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86394" } }
{"authors":"Charles Ziegler::Environmental Protection Agency Washington DC--Kerry Burch::Environmental Protection Agency Washington DC--Gerard Laniak::Environmental Protection Agency Washington DC--Ann Vega::Environmental Protection Agency Washington DC--Paul Harten::Environmental Protection Agency Washington DC--Janet Kremer::Environmental Protection Agency Washington DC--Allen Brookes::Environmental Protection Agency Washington DC--Andrew Yuen::--Bhagya Subramanian::--", "title":"IN31B-1768: US EPA Digital Science: An Evolution", "abstract":"The United States Environmental Protection Agency’s (US EPA) digital science “enterprise” plays a critical role in US EPA’s efforts to achieve its mission to protect human health and the environment. This enterprise is an evolving cross-disciplinary research and development construct, with social and institutional dimensions. It has an active development community and produces a portfolio of digital science products including decision support tools, data repositories, Web interfaces, and more. Earth sciences and sustainable development organizations from around the world – including US government agencies – have achieved various levels of success in taking advantage of the rapidly-evolving digital age. Efficiency, transparency and ability to innovate are tied to an organization’s digital maturity and related social characteristics. Concepts like participatory web, data and software interoperability, global technology transfer, ontological harmonization, big data, scaling, re-use and open science are no longer “new and emerging.” They have emerged and – in some cases – are tied to US government directives. We assess maturity, describe future scenarios, discuss new initiatives and outline steps for better leveraging the information age to more effectively and efficiently achieve US EPA’s mission. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the organizations for which they work and/or represent.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86394", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86396" } }
{"authors":"Justin Stachnik::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory University of California, Los Angeles--Duane Waliser::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Andrew Majda::New York University--Samuel Stechmann::University of Wisconsin Madison--Sulian Thual::New York University--", "title":"A21M-02: Evaluating MJO Event Initiation and Decay in the Skeleton Model using an RMM-like Index", "abstract":"The Madden-Julian oscillation (MJO) skeleton model is a low-order dynamic model that is capable of simulating many of the observed features of the MJO. This study develops a model- based “MJO” index that is similar to the well-known real-time multivariate MJO (RMM) index to better facilitate comparison between the skeleton model and observational data. Multivariate and univariate empirical orthogonal function (EOF) analyses were performed on the convective heating and zonal wind data taken from the skeleton model for simulations forced with an idealized warm pool and observed sea surface temperatures (SSTs). The leading EOF modes indicated a wavenumber-1 convectively-coupled circulation anomaly with zonal asymmetries that closely resembled the observed RMM EOFs, especially when the model was forced with observed SSTs.   The RMM-like index was used to compute an MJO climatology and document the occurrence of primary, continuing, and terminating MJO events in the skeleton model. The overall amount of MJO activity and event lengths compared reasonably well to observations for such a simple model. Attempts at reconciling the observed geographic distribution of MJO events were not successful for the stochastic simulations, though the introduction of stochasticity to the convective parameterization was necessary in order to produce composite MJOs that initiate and decay with time scales similar to observations. Finally, analysis indicates that the existence of higher-frequency, eastward travelling waves with larger wavenumbers (k ≈ 12) embedded within the large-scale flow often precedes MJO termination in the skeleton model.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86396", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86398" } }
{"authors":"Daniel Morgan::Vanderbilt University--Sarah Sams::Vanderbilt University--Julia Liu::Vanderbilt University--Katherine Edwards::Vanderbilt University--Carson Hedberg::Vanderbilt University--Kyle Ringger::Vanderbilt University--Mitchell Stocky::Vanderbilt University--Ashley Ball::Johns Hopkins University--Michael Diamond::Vanderbilt University--Josh Cox::Vanderbilt University--Eli Orland::Middlebury College--Frank Lyles::Pomona College--Theodore Bibby::University of North Dakota--Collin Giusti::University of North Dakota--Erin Hoeft::University of North Dakota--Jaakko Putkonen::University of North Dakota--Greg Balco::Berkeley Geochronology Center--", "title":"PP11A-2214: A Method for Constraining Glacial Boulder Exposure Ages with Bedrock Erosion Rates Utilizing Cosmogenic Ne-21 from the Central Transantarctic Mountains", "abstract":"Exposure dating with cosmogenic nuclides can be an underdetermined problem because the measured concentration depends on three unknowns: the nuclides accumulated during previous exposure, the erosion rate, and the time period of exposure. Frequently, assumptions have to be made about inherited nuclide concentrations and erosion rates, which can limit the interpretation of results. For example, if erosion is assumed to be zero, then the measured concentration must be interpreted as a minimum exposure age because an erosion rate greater than zero would require more time to pass to accumulate the measured nuclide concentration. Rock erosion rates are rarely measured, so erosion rates have to be assumed from other sources of data. Here we present a method for determining the rock erosion rate from bedrock of the same lithology as boulders that we want to exposure date. We use cosmogenic Ne-21 concentrations in quartz to determine the bedrock erosion rate, and then apply the measured bedrock erosion rate to constrain the cosmogenic Ne-21 exposure age of glacially transported boulders. Because the glacially transported boulders are the same lithology as the bedrock, and they are from the same general locale and have experienced the same climate conditions during exposure, the boulder erosion rates should be consistent with the measured bedrock erosion rates. We collected samples from two sites within the Central Transantarctic Mountains: Ong Valley (157.5°E, 83.25°S), where the bedrock consists of Hope Granite and the Argo Gneiss, and Moraine Canyon (157.55°W, 86.1°S), where the bedrock is a silicic porphyry of the Wyatt Formation. At both sites, we collected bedrock samples above the glacial limit and boulders from the glacial drifts on the valley floor. Preliminary results are that the bedrock is eroding at rates of 17 - 41 cm/Myrs, averaging 23 cm/yr. The range of erosion rates is used to constrain the age of glacial drifts in these valleys, which vary from 10 kyrs to 4.5 Myrs.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86398", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86399" } }
{"authors":"Kenneth Creager::University of Washington--Kazushige Obara::Earthquake Research Institute, University of Tokyo--", "title":"T22C-05: Comparison of Tectonic Tremor in Southwest Japan and Cascadia", "abstract":"Tectonic tremor in southwest Japan and Cascadia have a number of similarities and differences. We analyze tremor catalogs from these two subduction zones in order to highlight some of the differences and to determine whether the differences are related to data quality and methodologies. We start with existing tremor catalogs produced by Obara in Japan and Wech in Cascadia. The raw catalogs are constructed with a number of important differences related to data quality, time window size, horizontal versus vertical component data and use of amplitudes. This allows the Japan catalog to have finer temporal resolution and to detect lower amplitude tremor. We have developed an algorithm to cluster the individual tremors into spatial and temporal swarms, which we interpret to represent slow slip events. We find that for both regions, the number of tremor swarms exceeding a given duration follows a power-law distribution. If duration is proportional to seismic moment, as has been commonly assumed, the moment inferred from these swarms follows a standard Gutenberg-Richter logarithmic frequency-magnitude relation with b-values close to 1. We find that for each catalog there is a clear region where this distribution explains the data well. In each case, as with all earthquake catalogs, there is a level below which which the catalogs are incomplete. This level is lower in Japan than Casciadia. However, there is also a clear size above which the catalogs have significantly fewer events than expected by this distribution. This occurs at a duration of about 10-15 hours for southwest Japan and about 150 hours for Cascadia. We interpret this as representing a cutoff between unbounded, small events that follow the scale-invariant Gutenberg-Richter distribution, and large slip events that fill the down-dip width of the slow-slip zone and are therefore geometically bounded. This is consistent with the much narrower spatial distribution of tremor in southwest Japan than in Cascadia. The catalogs are now of sufficient size (1500-2000 swarms) to resolve regional differences in the slow-slip statistics.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86399", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86400" } }
{"authors":"J. Thomas Farrar::Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution--Ted Durland::Oregon State University--", "title":"OS51A-1970: Time-space Variability of Weekly to Monthly Period Equatorial Waves in the Pacific Ocean", "abstract":"Data from satellite altimetry are used to characterize wavelike variability in the tropical Pacific Ocean at periods of days to two months. This period band is of interest because the space-time scales of oceanic equatorial waves at these frequencies have historically made adequate observation of the variability difficult. These waves have zonal scales that are very large (exceeding 3000 km) and meridional scales that are relatively short (~100 km), making in situ measurements difficult, and the short temporal scales pose challenges for observation with satellite altimeters because the wave periods are short compared to orbit repeat periods. As a result, there has been relatively little progress since the early 1980s in characterizing and understanding these equatorial inertia-gravity and mixed Rossby-gravity waves. In this analysis, we seek to exploit the long zonal length scales of these high-frequency equatorial waves in an analysis of satellite scatterometer and altimeter data to shed new light on the properties and dynamics of these waves. At periods of 2-14 days, there is clear evidence for the presence of several basin-scale equatorial wave modes, including mixed Rossby-gravity waves and inertia-gravity waves associated with baroclinic modes one and two. Here, we focus on equatorial Kelvin waves and mixed Rossby-gravity waves forced in the western Pacific, and examine their variability in time and space and their relation to wind.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86400", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86401" } }
{"authors":"Yisong Xie::RADI Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Zhengqiang Li::Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China--Hua Xu::RADI Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Xingfeng Chen::RADI Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Kaitao Li::RADI Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Yang Lv::RADI Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Donghui Li::RADI Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Ying Zhang::State Environmental Protection Key Laboratory of Satellites Remote Sensing Applications--", "title":"A51B-0047: Retrieval of aerosol composition using ground-based remote sensing measurements", "abstract":"The chemical composition and mixing status of ambient aerosol are the main factors deciding aerosol microphysical and optical properties, and thus have significant impacts on regional or global climate change and air quality. Traditional approaches to detect atmospheric aerosol composition include sampling with laboratory analysis and in-situ measurement. They can accurately acquire aerosol components, however, the sampling or air exhausting could change the status of aerosol or have some mass loss. Additionally, aerosol is usually sampled at the surface level so that it is difficult to detect the columnar aerosol properties. Remote sensing technology, however, can overcome these problems because it investigate aerosol information by optical and microphysical properties without destructing the natural status of ambient aerosol. This paper introduce a method to acquire aerosol composition by the remote sensing measurements of CIMEL CE318 ground-based sun-sky radiometer. A six component aerosol model is used in this study, including one strong absorbing component Black Carbon (BC), two partly absorbing components Brown Carbon (BrC) and Mineral Dust (MD), two scattering components Ammonia Sulfate-like (AS) and Sea Salt (SS), and Aerosol Water uptake (AW). Sensitivity analysis are performed to find the most sensitive parameters to each component and retrieval method for each component is accordingly developed. The residual minimization method is used by comparing remote sensing measurements and simulation outputs to find the optimization of aerosol composition (including volume fraction and mass concentration of each component). This method is applied to real measurements obtained from Beijing site under different weather conditions, including polluted haze, dust storm and clean days, to investigate the impacts of mixing states of aerosol particles on aerosol composition retrieval.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86401", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86402" } }
{"authors":"Ryan Ewing::Texas A&M University--Gary Kocurek::University of Texas--", "title":"EP33B-1066: Trickle-down boundary conditions in aeolian dune-field pattern formation", "abstract":"One the one hand, wind-blown dune-field patterns emerge within the overarching boundary conditions of climate, tectonics and eustasy implying the presence of these signals in the aeolian geomorphic and stratigraphic record. On the other hand, dune-field patterns are a poster-child of self-organization, in which autogenic processes give rise to patterned landscapes despite remarkable differences in the geologic setting (i.e., Earth, Mars and Titan). How important are climate, tectonics and eustasy in aeolian dune field pattern formation? Here we develop the hypothesis that, in terms of pattern development, dune fields evolve largely independent of the direct influence of ‘system-scale’ boundary conditions, such as climate, tectonics and eustasy. Rather, these boundary conditions set the stage for smaller-scale, faster-evolving ‘event-scale’ boundary conditions. This ‘trickle-down’ effect, in which system-scale boundary conditions indirectly influence the event scale boundary conditions provides the uniqueness and richness of dune-field patterned landscapes. The trickle-down effect means that the architecture of the stratigraphic record of dune-field pattern formation archives boundary conditions, which are spatially and temporally removed from the overarching geologic setting. In contrast, the presence of an aeolian stratigraphic record itself, reflects changes in system-scale boundary conditions that drive accumulation and preservation of aeolian strata.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86402", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86403" } }
{"authors":"Jeffrey Klenzing::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Andrea Hughes::Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University--Angeline Burrell::University of Leicester--Russell Stoneback::University of Texas at Dallas--Dieter Bilitza::George Mason University Fairfax--", "title":"SA13B-2373: Performance of the IRI-2012 Model in the Low- and Mid-Latitudes: Variations with Longitude and Solar Activity", "abstract":"The International Reference Ionosphere (IRI) is the internationally recognized model for calculating empirical ionospheric parameters such as plasma density, composition, and temperature. Estimates of the topside F-region ion density rely on accurately predicting the peak density and height of the F-layer and describing how the density decays with altitude. The latest incarnation of the IRI model (IRI-2012) includes two options to estimate the F-peak and three options to shape the topside profile. Previously it was shown that IRI overestimated the topside ionospheric densities during solar minimum between cycles 23 and 24, and the relative performance of the three topside shaper functions were compared. Here we reconstruct maps of the ionosphere near the magnetic equator using information about the F-peak from the Formosa Satellite-3/ Constellation Observing System for Meteorology, Ionosphere, and Climate (FORMOSAT-3/COSMIC) and ion densities above 400 km from the Coupled Ion-Neutral Dynamics Investigation (CINDI) instrument on the Communication/Navigation Outage Forecasting System (C/NOFS) satellite. By simultaneously comparing the both the peak ionospheric density and the topside ion densities, we can better evaluate the combinations of the component models in IRI-2012.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86403", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86404" } }
{"authors":"Ali Forghani::Utah State University--Richard Peralta::Utah State University--", "title":"H21A-1335: Model and Parameter Discretization Impacts on Estimated ASR Recovery Efficiency", "abstract":"We contrast computed recovery efficiency of one Aquifer Storage and Recovery (ASR) well using several modeling situations. Test situations differ in employed finite difference grid discretization, hydraulic conductivity, and storativity. We employ a 7-layer regional groundwater model calibrated for Salt Lake Valley. Since the regional model grid is too coarse for ASR analysis, we prepare two local models with significantly smaller discretization capable of analyzing ASR recovery efficiency. Some addressed situations employ parameters interpolated from the coarse valley model. Other situations employ parameters derived from nearby well logs or pumping tests. The intent of the evaluations and subsequent sensitivity analysis is to show how significantly the employed discretization and aquifer parameters affect estimated recovery efficiency. Most of previous studies to evaluate ASR recovery efficiency only consider hypothetical uniform specified boundary heads and gradient assuming homogeneous aquifer parameters. The well is part of the Jordan Valley Water Conservancy District (JVWCD) ASR system, that lies within Salt Lake Valley.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86404", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86405" } }
{"authors":"Qing Bao::Institute of Atmospheric Physics--", "title":"A41D-0098: Finite-volume Atmospheric Model of the IAP/LASG (FAMIL)", "abstract":"The Finite-volume Atmospheric Model of the IAP/LASG (FAMIL) is introduced in this work. FAMIL have the flexible horizontal and vertical resolutions up to 25km and 1Pa respectively, which currently running on the “Tianhe 1A&2” supercomputers. FAMIL is the atmospheric component of the third-generation Flexible Global Ocean–Atmosphere–Land climate System model (FGOALS3) which will participate in the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 (CMIP6). In addition to describing the dynamical core and physical parameterizations of FAMIL, this talk describes the simulated characteristics of energy and water balances, precipitation, Asian Summer Monsoon and stratospheric circulation, and compares them with observational/reanalysis data. Finally, the model biases as well as possible solutions are discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86405", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86406" } }
{"authors":"Warren Helgason::University of Saskatchewan--Richard Farrell::University of Saskatchewan--Joel Ens::University of Saskatchewan University of Saskatchewan--Reynald Lemke::Agriculture and Ari-Food Canada--Cody David::University of Saskatchewan--", "title":"B33C-0705: Snowcover Influences Upon Episodic Release of Nitrous Oxide from Agricultural Soils During Spring Thaw", "abstract":"In regions where agricultural soils seasonally freeze, such as the Canadian prairies, up to 60-70% of the annual nitrous oxide (N2O) emission can occur during the soil thaw period. The conditions responsible for this episodic release of N2O are poorly understood. In order to elucidate the influencing factors a replicated plot study was conducted in Outlook, Saskatchewan, Canada (51.5°N) during the 2014-2015 winter period. The study compared soil thermal conditions and soil gas fluxes (nitrous oxide and carbon dioxide) from plots that had the snow periodically removed and those on which snow was allowed to accumulate. Soil gas fluxes were measured using an automated chamber system (Gasmet DX4030 FTIR analyzer and Licor Li-8100 chamber system) and analyzer. Soil conditions were continuously monitored throughout the winter and thaw periods. Owing to the insulating effect of snow, the snow free plots were colder during the mid-winter period, but thawed 3-4 days earlier than the snow covered treatment. Following thaw, the snow-free plots were 2-3 degrees warmer than the snow-covered plots for 5-7 days before reaching a similar thermal regime. Due to the differences in the timing of soil thaw and the pre- and post-thaw thermal conditions, cumulative and peak N2O emissions were much higher from the plots that had been kept snow-free. These results suggest that agricultural practices which influence snow redistribution may have an effect upon spring soil gas fluxes. This study also highlights the importance of incorporating snowmelt and soil thaw physics into process-based greenhouse gas models.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86406", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86409" } }
{"authors":"Hangsheng Lin::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--Steve Banwart::University of Sheffield--Timothy Filley::Purdue University--Dali Guo::Chinese Academy of Sciences--Daniel Richter::Duke University--Susan Trumbore::Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry--Harry Vereecken::Agrosphere Institute (IBG-3) Forschungszentrum Jülich--Joerg Voelkel::Technical University of Munich--", "title":"EP31A-0980: Towards an International Network of Critical Zone Observatories", "abstract":"The Earth’s Critical Zone (CZ) concept provides a holistic and unifying framework to understand diverse Earth surficial processes, encompassing the hydrologic cycle, the geochemical cycle, the carbon cycle, the nutrient cycle, gas exchange (major and trace gases), erosion and deposition, weathering, lithification (diagenesis), soil formation and evolution (pedogenesis), life processes (macro- and microbial communities), and human impacts (land use and management). Among the complexity of the CZ are the integration of abiotic and biotic processes, the linkage between belowground and aboveground systems, and the unification of time and space dimensions. Three aspects unique to CZ can be used to differentiate Critical Zone Observatories (CZOs) from other terrestrial environmental observing systems : 1) Deep time, including geologic timescale to understand the formation and evolution of the Earth’s surficial environment and the reconciliation of long- and short-time scale processes; 2) Deep depth into weathered bedrock, which is much deeper than the classical perception of soils perceived as 1-2 m root zone; and 3) Deep coupling of diverse processes, including interactions and feedbacks among geologic, pedologic, hydrologic, biologic, geochemical, atmospheric, and anthropogenic processes. These “three deeps” can be used to guide the development of the international network of CZOs. The US, EU, Germany, UK, China, and Australia are leading the way to establish such an international network, which can serve the international scientific community through interdisciplinary research, common infrastructure, shared databases, integrated models, and the education of new generations of earth and environmental scientists.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86409", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86410" } }
{"authors":"Edward Matteo::Sandia National Laboratories--Yifeng Wang::Sandia Natl Labs--Jessica Kruichak::Sandia National Laboratories--Melissa Mills::--", "title":"MR41C-2651: Characterization of Heat-treated Clay Minerals in the Context of Nuclear Waste Disposal", "abstract":"Clay minerals are likely candidates to aid in nuclear waste isolation due to their low permeability, favorable swelling properties, and high cation sorption capacities. Establishing the thermal limit for clay minerals in a nuclear waste repository is a potentially important component of repository design, as flexibility of the heat load within the repository can have a major impact on the selection of repository design. For example, the thermal limit plays a critical role in the time that waste packages would need to cool before being transferred to the repository. Understanding the chemical and physical changes, if any, that occur in clay minerals at various temperatures above the current thermal limit (of 100 °C) can enable decision-makers with information critical to evaluating the potential trade-offs of increasing the thermal limit within the repository. Most critical is gaining understanding of how varying thermal conditions in the repository will impact radionuclide sorption and transport in clay materials either as engineered barriers or as disposal media. A variety of repository-relevant clay minerals (illite, mixed layer illite/smectite, and montmorillonite), were heated for a range of temperatures between 100-1000 °C. These samples were characterized to determine surface area, mineralogical alteration, and cation exchange capacity (CEC). Our results show that for conditions up to 500 °C, no significant change occurs, so long as the clay mineral remains mineralogically intact. At temperatures above 500 °C, transformation of the layered silicates into silica phases leads to alteration that impacts important clay characteristics. Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-program laboratory managed and operated by Sandia Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Lockheed Martin Corporation, for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Nation Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-AC04-94AL85000. SAND Number: SAND2015-6524 A", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86410", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86411" } }
{"authors":"Lawson Hill::University of California Berkeley--Yumchindorj Damdinsuren::Social Impact--Purevdorj Olkhanud::Mongolian National University of Medical Sciences--Kirk Smith::University of California Berkeley--Jay Turner::Washington University in St Louis--Rufus Edwards::University of California Irvine--Munkhtuul Odsuren::Mongolian National University of Medical Sciences--", "title":"A11M-0231: The Health Impacts of Energy Policy Pathways in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia: A Total Exposure Assessment", "abstract":"Ulaanbaatar is home to nearly half of Mongolia’s 2.8 million residents. The city’s rapid growth, frigid winters, valley topography, and reliance on coal-fired stoves have led to some of the worst winter pollution levels in the world. To better understand this issue, we modeled integrated PM2.5exposures and related health impacts for various city-wide heating policies through 2024. This assessment is one of the first to employ a total exposure approach and results of the 2014 Comparative Risk Assessments of the Global Burden of Disease Project (CRA/GBD) in a policy-relevant energy study. Emissions related to heating, traffic, and power generation were considered under Business as Usual, Moderate Improvement, and Max Improvement scenarios. Calibrated outdoor models were combined with indoor models, local infiltration and time activity estimates, and demographic projections to estimate PM2.5exposures in 2014 and 2024. Indoor exposures were assigned by heating type, home type, and smoking status; outdoor exposures were assigned through geocoding. Population average annual exposures were calculated and applied to local disease rates and integrated exposure-response curves (2014 CRA/GBD) to arrive at annual projections of premature deaths and DALYs. We estimate 2014 annual average exposures at 68 µg/m3, dictated almost exclusively by indoor winter exposures. Under current trends, annual exposures increase 10% to 75 µg/m3 in 2024. This is in stark contrast to the moderate and max improvement scenarios, which lead to 2024 annual exposures that are 31%, and 68% lower, respectively. Under the Moderate scenario, 2024 per capita annual DALY and death burdens drop 26% and 22%, respectively, from 2014 levels. Under the Max scenario, 2024 per capita annual DALY and death burdens drop 71% and 66%, respectively, from 2014. SHS becomes a major contributor as emissions from other sectors decrease. Reductions are dominated by cardiovascular and lower respiratory diseases in children.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86411", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86412" } }
{"authors":"Benjamin Hudson::Applied Physics Laboratory University of Washington--", "title":"C51B-0713: Probability based hydrologic catchments of the Greenland Ice Sheet", "abstract":"Greenland Ice Sheet melt water impacts ice sheet flow dynamics, fjord and coastal circulation, and sediment and biogeochemical fluxes. Melt water exiting the ice sheet also is a key term in its mass balance. Because of this, knowledge of the area of the ice sheet that contributes melt water to a given outlet (its hydrologic catchment) is important to many ice sheet studies and is especially critical to methods using river runoff to assess ice sheet mass balance. Yet uncertainty in delineating ice sheet hydrologic catchments is a problem that is rarely acknowledged. Ice sheet catchments are delineated as a function of both basal and surface topography. While surface topography is well known, basal topography is less certain because it is dependent on radar surveys. Here, I a present a Monte Carlo based approach to delineating ice sheet catchments that quantifies the impact of uncertain basal topography. In this scheme, over many iterations I randomly vary the ice sheet bed elevation within published error bounds (using Morlighem et al., 2014 bed and bed error datasets). For each iteration of ice sheet bed elevation, I calculate the hydraulic potentiometric surface and route water over its path of ‘steepest’ descent to delineate the catchment. I then use all realizations of the catchment to arrive at a probability map of all major melt water outlets in Greenland. I often find that catchment size is uncertain, with small, random perturbations in basal topography leading to large variations in catchments size. While some catchments are well defined, others can double or halve in size within published basal topography error bars. While some uncertainty will likely always remain, this work points to locations where studies of ice sheet hydrology would be the most successful, allows reinterpretation of past results, and points to where future radar surveys would be most advantageous.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86412", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86413" } }
{"authors":"Christian Hardwick::Utah Geological Survey--", "title":"NS34A-05: Multidisciplinary approach in a water salinity study of the southern San Pitch drainage, Sanpete County, Utah", "abstract":"Geologic mapping and geophysical techniques corroborate surface water surveys to identify regions in the subsurface that likely influence San Pitch River salinity in central Utah. Geologic mapping reveals that two members of the Arapien Shale are likely present in the subsurface beneath the areas where saline springs are found. Previous studies specified halite deposits in one member, and indicated the other member is known to contain halite in the general region. A total of 49 unique Transient Electromagnetic Method (TEM) stations were measured in the study area using a ground loop layout. Modeling of TEM data reveals one very shallow conductive body (1 to 10 ohm.m) between desilting basins and the San Pitch River that we interpret to be saline groundwater. A larger, deeper, and more continuous conductive body, observed in the northeast part of the study area, is interpreted as a geologic feature, most likely Arapien Shale. We measured or estimated discharge (flow) at 53 unique locations within streams and from seeps and springs, and estimated water quality (field parameters) at 172 different sites within the flow regime, measuring some sites multiple times during different seasons. Our results show that a 1.6 mile reach of the San Pitch River between the Highway 89 bridge and the confluence with Twelvemile Creek is a major source of salt loading; salt load increases from mostly less than 50 g/s above the bridge to nearly 300 g/s above the confluence. An addition of 80 to 90 g/s salt load from Twelvemile Creek, which carries salt from a 10-acre saline marsh, combines to bring the overall salt load carried by the San Pitch River at a point of irrigation use 3 miles downstream to between approximately 400 g/s in the spring to approximately 650 g/s in autumn. Our combined geologic, geophysical, and hydrologic assessment indicates that the source of salinity in the San Pitch River and Twelvemile Creek is dissolution of salt from the Arapien Shale and its erosional remnants by groundwater and seepage from irrigation works. The data collected for this study provide information necessary to make targeted management decisions to reduce salinity and provide for a sustainable supply of acceptable/suitable quality of irrigation water to users.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86413", "section":"Near Surface Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86414" } }
{"authors":"Craig Mahoney::University of Lethbridge--Chris Hopkinson::University of Lethbridge--Andre Held::CSIRO Land and Water Canberra--", "title":"B21D-0489: Mapping canopy gap fraction and leaf area index at continent-scale from satellite lidar", "abstract":"Information on canopy cover is essential for understanding spatial and temporal variability in vegetation biomass, local meteorological processes and hydrological transfers within vegetated environments. Gap fraction (GF), an index of canopy cover, is often derived over large areas (100’s km2) via airborne laser scanning (ALS), estimates of which are reasonably well understood. However, obtaining country-wide estimates is challenging due to the lack of spatially distributed point cloud data. The Geoscience Laser Altimeter System (GLAS) removes spatial limitations, however, its large footprint nature and continuous waveform data measurements make derivations of GF challenging. ALS data from 3 Australian sites are used as a basis to scale-up GF estimates to GLAS footprint data by the use of a physically-based Weibull function. Spaceborne estimates of GF are employed in conjunction with supplementary predictor variables in the predictive Random Forest algorithm to yield country-wide estimates at a 250 m spatial resolution; country-wide estimates are accompanied with uncertainties at the pixel level. Preliminary estimates of effective Leaf Area Index (eLAI) are also presented by converting GF via the Beer-Lambert law, where an extinction coefficient of 0.5 is employed; deemed acceptable at such spatial scales. The need for such wide-scale quantification of GF and eLAI are key in the assessment and modification of current forest management strategies across Australia. Such work also assists Australia’s Terrestrial Ecosystem Research Network (TERN), a key asset to policy makers with regards to the management of the national ecosystem, in fulfilling their government issued mandates.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86414", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86415" } }
{"authors":"Daniel Metzen::University of Melbourne--Gary Sheridan::University of Melbourne--Richard Benyon::University of Melbourne--Patrick Lane::University of Melbourne--", "title":"H21C-1393: Using high resolution aridity and drainage position data to better predict rainfall-runoff relationships in complex upland topography", "abstract":"In topographically complex terrain, the interaction of aspect-dependent solar exposure and drainage-position-dependent flow accumulation results in energy and water partitioning that is highly spatially variable. Catchment scale rainfall-runoff relationships are dependent on these smaller scale spatial patterns. However, there remains considerable uncertainty as to how to represent this smaller scale variability within lumped parameter, catchment scale rainfall-runoff models. In this study we aim to measure and represent the key interactions between aridity and drainage position in complex terrain to inform the development of simple catchment-scale hydrologic model parameters. Six measurement plots were setup on opposing slopes in an east-west facing eucalypt forest headwater catchment. The field sites are spanning three drainage positions with two contrasting aridity indices each, while minimizing variations in other factors, e.g. geology and weather patterns. Sapflow, soil water content (SWC) and throughfall were continuously monitored on two convergent hillslopes with similar size (1.3 and 1.6ha) but contrasting aspects (north and south). Soil depth varied from 0.6m at the topslope to >2m at the bottomslope positions. Maximum tree heights ranged from 16.2m to 36.9m on the equator-facing slope and from 30.1m to 45.5m on the pole-facing slope, with height decreasing upslope on both aspects. Two evapotranspiration (ET) patterns emerged in relation to aridity and drainage position. On the equator-facing slope (AI~ 2.1), seasonal understorey and overstorey ET patterns were in sync, whereas on the pole-facing slope (AI~1.5) understorey ET showed larger seasonal fluctuations than overstorey ET. Seasonal ET patterns and competition between soil evaporation and root water uptake lead to distinct differences in profile SWC across the sites, likely caused by depletion from different depths. Topsoil water content on equator-facing slopes was generally lower and responded more rapidly to rainfall pulses than on pole-facing slopes. Future work will focus on how observed ET and SWC patterns in relation to aridity and drainage position can be implemented into a simplistic modelling framework.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86415", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86416" } }
{"authors":"Sanjay Shukla::University of Florida--Rajendra Sishodia::Graduate Research Assistant--Wendy Graham::University of Florida--James Jones::Professor--Suhas Wani::International Crops Research Institute--James Heaney::University of Florida--", "title":"H13J-1726: Groundwater Trends and Availability Under Current and Future Groundwater Withdrawals and Climate Scenarios in Semi-arid India", "abstract":"Irrigation withdrawals have caused groundwater depletion, decreased surface flows and water quality problems in many parts of the world including India. Anticipated increase in groundwater demand and climate change is likely to exacerbate the problem. This study investigated long term (1990-2012) groundwater level trends in hard rock aquifers of semi-arid south India and used an integrated hydrologic model MIKE SHE/MIKE 11 to analyze the effects of changes in groundwater withdrawals and climate on groundwater and surface water flow and levels. Contrary to the common perception of widespread groundwater declines, statistical trend test results showed significant declines in only 22-36% of the wells in a three district region (3.15 million ha). Free electricity policy for farmers, implemented in 2004, and increased irrigated area were the two main causal factors. Groundwater levels in up to 76% of these wells showed significant decline after the subsidy (2005-2012) indicating the nexus between energy and groundwater. An integrated hydrologic model, developed using long-term monitoring data for a watershed (320 ha) in the region, performed well in simulating surface and groundwater levels. Compared to the current withdrawal scenario, prolonged hydrologic drought and decreased surface flows were predicted under future withdrawal scenarios. Future (2040-2069) climate scenarios from five General Circulation Models (GCMs), showed increased rainfall and flooding in the watershed. Although, projected increase in rainfall under the climate change scenarios is likely to provide opportunities for capture and reuse of surface flows, earlier well drying, and increased frequency and duration of hydrologic drought is likely to affect livelihoods of millions of small-scale farmers in this hard rock aquifer region. Several management options including changes in power subsidy and implementation of efficient irrigation systems, effective institutional mechanism to regulate groundwater, and storage and use of excess runoff, were evaluated to maintain or enhance the future groundwater availability.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86416", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86417" } }
{"authors":"Matthew Dare::University of Rochester--John Tarduno::University of Rochester University of Rochester--Rory Cottrell::University of Rochester--Richard Bono::University of Rochester--", "title":"GP23B-1304: Multi-scale analyses of magnetic carriers in the Jack Hills metaconglomerates, Western Australia: Further evidence for a primary magnetization", "abstract":"Metaconglomerates from the Jack Hills, Western Australia, host zircons up to approximately 4.4 billion years old; these zircons are targets for single crystal paleointensity analyses (Tarduno et al. 2006, 2014, 2015). Cobble-sized quartz clasts from the metaconglomerate contain a high unblocking temperature component of magnetization that is resolvable only with the most sensitive DC SQUID magnetometers optimized for low intensity measurements. The high unblocking component passes a conglomerate test, overprinted by a complex series of low unblocking temperature magnetizations (Tarduno and Cottrell, 2013). Here we investigate the physical, chemical and magnetic properties of magnetic minerals within the cobbles to better understand their origin and the nature of their remanence records. We first use reflected light microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, and energy dispersive spectroscopy to study magnetic grain morphology and basic chemical composition. Our data detail a suite of magnetic minerals that match the unblocking temperature interpretations of Tarduno and Cottrell, 2013. These data also show as false the claim of Weiss et al., 2015 that high unblocking temperature phases such as magnetite are exclusively secondary products of laboratory heating. Magnetic hysteresis measurements on the cobbles are a challenge because the material is dominantly quartz. Within the context of careful calibration measurements with high sensitivity probes, we next discuss magnetic hysteresis and First Order Reversal Curve (FORC) analyses on samples ranging in size from submillimeter to several millimeters and compare these within a cobble, and between cobbles. Finally, given the background of our microscopy, spectroscopy, and magnetic hysteresis results, we evaluate hypotheses for the origin of the low unblocking temperature components of magnetization. Overall, our new data adds further support for the preservation of primary magnetizations in some Jack Hills sedimentary rocks.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86417", "section":"Geomagnetism and Paleomagnetism"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86418" } }
{"authors":"Mohamed Ammar::University of Alberta--Evan Davies::University of Alberta--", "title":"GC13D-1194: A process-based agricultural model for the irrigated agriculture sector in Alberta, Canada", "abstract":"Connections between land and water, irrigation, agricultural productivity and profitability, policy alternatives, and climate change and variability are complex, poorly understood, and unpredictable. Policy assessment for agriculture presents a large potential for development of broad-based simulation models that can aid assessment and quantification of policy alternatives over longer temporal scales. The Canadian irrigated agriculture sector is concentrated in Alberta, where it represents two thirds of the irrigated land-base in Canada and is the largest consumer of surface water. Despite interest in irrigation expansion, its potential in Alberta is uncertain given a constrained water supply, significant social and economic development and increasing demands for both land and water, and climate change. This paper therefore introduces a system dynamics model as a decision support tool to provide insights into irrigation expansion in Alberta, and into trade-offs and risks associated with that expansion. It is intended to be used by a wide variety of users including researchers, policy analysts and planners, and irrigation managers. A process-based cropping system approach is at the core of the model and uses a water-driven crop growth mechanism described by AquaCrop. The tool goes beyond a representation of crop phenology and cropping systems by permitting assessment and quantification of the broader, long-term consequences of agricultural policies for Alberta’s irrigation sector. It also encourages collaboration and provides a degree of transparency that gives confidence in simulation results. The paper focuses on the agricultural component of the systems model, describing the process involved; soil water and nutrients balance, crop growth, and water, temperature, salinity, and nutrients stresses, and how other disciplines can be integrated to account for the effects of interactions and feedbacks in the whole system. In later stages, other components such as livestock production systems and agricultural production economics will be integrated to the agricultural model to make the systems tool. It will capture feedback loops, time delays, and the nonlinearities of the system. Moreover, the model is designed for quick reconfiguration to different regions given parametrized crop data.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86418", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86419" } }
{"authors":"Thomas Hopson::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Maria Frediani::Organization Not Listed--Emmanouil Anagnostou::University of Connecticut--Joshua Hacker::National Center for Atmospheric Research--", "title":"NG33A-1850: The Object-analogue approach for probabilistic forecasting", "abstract":"The object-analogue is a new method to estimate forecast uncertainty and to derive probabilistic predictions of gridded forecast fields over larger regions rather than point locations. The method has been developed for improving the forecast of 10-meter wind speed over the northeast US, and it can be extended to other forecast variables, vertical levels, and other regions. The object-analogue approach combines the analog post-processing technique (Hopson 2005; Hamill 2006; Delle Monache 2011) with the Method for Object-based Diagnostic Evaluation (MODE) for forecast verification (Davis et al 2006a, b). Originally, MODE is used to verify mainly precipitation forecasts using features of a forecast region represented by an object. The analog technique is used to reduce the NWP systematic and random errors of a gridded forecast field. In this study we use MODE-derived objects to characterize the wind fields forecasts into attributes such as object area, centroid location, and intensity percentiles, and apply the analogue concept to these objects. The object-analogue method uses a database of objects derived from reforecasts and their respective reanalysis. Given a real-time forecast field, it searches the database and selects the top-ranked objects with the most similar set of attributes using the MODE fuzzy logic algorithm for object matching. The attribute probabilities obtained with the set of selected object-analogues are used to derive a multi-layer probabilistic prediction. The attribute probabilities are combined into three uncertainty layers that address the main concerns of most applications: location, area, and magnitude. The multi-layer uncertainty can be weighted and combined or used independently in such that it provides a more accurate prediction, adjusted according to the application interest. In this study we present preliminary results of the object-analogue method. Using a database with one hundred storms we perform a leave-one-out cross-validation to verify the model results.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86419", "section":"Nonlinear Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86420" } }
{"authors":"Ulrich Faul::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--Emmanuel David::Australian National University--Christopher Cline::Australian National University--Andrew Berry::Australian National University--Ian Jackson::Australian National University--", "title":"MR32A-09: The Identity of Hydrous Defects Controlling the Rheology of Olivine", "abstract":"The reduction of the creep strength of minerals due to the presence of water is well established. The nature of the relevant hydrous defect(s) is perhaps less well understood. Standard treatments examine intrinsic defects of a pure crystal, but impurity-related defects are not usually considered. Natural olivine contains monovalent (Na) and trivalent (e.g. Al) trace elements in concentrations that exceed the concentration of intrinsic defects by up to an order of magnitude. They therefore are potentially important as agents for water-weakening. Hydrated defects - both intrinsic and impurity-related – systematically affect infrared absorption spectra, which can therefore be used for their identification and quantification. Experiments with olivine in contact with a range of buffer assemblages (e.g. MgO and enstatite) have shown that the infrared spectra of natural olivine can only be reproduced experimentally in the presence of titanium. Doping with a range of trivalent cations shows systematics in the infrared spectra related to the ionic radius of the dopants, confirming that the spectra are sensitive to the bonding environment and can be used to identify particular defects. To investigate the relationship between hydrous, titanium-related defects and creep strength we conducted deformation experiments on synthetic Fo90 olivine that was buffered by enstatite and doped with titanium. The infrared spectra of the deformed samples show absorption bands at the same wave numbers and relative intensity as natural olivine, indicating that the experimental samples contain the same hydrous defects. Fitting the creep data from samples with a range of water contents determined from these absorption bands shows a near linear relationship between strain rate and water content, consistent with published observations. The experiments therefore show that the rheology of hydrous olivine is determined by hydrated impurity-related defects rather than intrinsic point defects.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86420", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86421" } }
{"authors":"Pierre-Joseph Hatton::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Timothy Filley::Purdue University--Subhasish Chatterjee::City University of New York--Apolline Auclerc::Universite de Lorraine--Mark Gormley::Queens College, CUNY--Keyvan Dastmalchi::City University of New York--Ruth Stark::City University of New York--Knute Nadelhoffer::Univ of Mich- Eco & Evol Bio--Jeffrey Bird::Queens College, CUNY--", "title":"GC33E-1358: Wood source and pyrolysis temperature interact to control PyOM degradation rates", "abstract":"Surprisingly little is known about how shifts in tree species composition and increased forest fire frequency and intensity will affect one of the most stable pools of soil organic matter, i.e. the pyrogenic organic matter (PyOM or char). In a previous study, we showed that wood source and pyrolysis temperature interact to control PyOM structure and potential reactivity for two tree species common in high-latitude forests, jack pine (JP) and red maple (RM). Here, we investigate whether these differences affect PyOM turnover by examining the fates of 13C/15N-enriched JP wood and PyOM pyrolyzed at 300 (JP300) and 450 °C (JP450) and RM pyrolyzed at 450 °C (RM450). The substrates were applied 1–3 cm below the O/A interface of a well-drained Spodosol in a long-term forest fire study located at the University of Michigan Biological Station (Pellston, MI, USA). 13C-CO2effluxes from the first 996 days of decay showed a significant wood source by pyrolysis temperature interaction on PyOM field mineralisation rates, with RM450 mineralising twice faster than JP450 during the first 90 days. Increasing pyrolysis temperature substantially decreased field mineralization rates during the first 996 days, with mineralisation rates 24 and 80 times slower for JP300 and JP450 compared with JP wood. After 1 year, (i) bacterial groups were large sinks for PyOM-derived C as pyrolysis temperature increased and as substrate use efficiency decreased; (ii) potential phenol oxidase and net peroxidase activities were unaffected by the PyOM addition, although net peroxidase activities measured tended to lesser for soils amended with JP450 and RM450; and (iii) Collembola detritivores appeared less likely to be found for soils amended with JP450 and RM450. PyOM-derived C and N recoveries did not differ after 1 year; we will present 3-y recovery data. Our results suggest that the composition of angiosperms (e.g. RM) and gymnosperms (e.g. JP) in high-latitude forests is an underappreciated but essential determinant of soil PyOM stocks and reactivity, with angiosperms yielding more degradable PyOM. Considering the wood source by pyrolysis temperature interaction on PyOM will help providing more comprehensive large-scale assessments of PyOM stocks and reactivity potentials under current and future climate conditions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86421", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86422" } }
{"authors":"Xuefei Hu::Emory University--Lance Waller::Emory University--Jessica Belle::Emory University--Yang Liu::Emory University--", "title":"A23C-0335: Estimation of PM2.5 Concentrations in the Conterminous U.S. Using MODIS data and a Three-Stage Model", "abstract":"previous studies showed that fine particulate matter (PM2.5, particles smaller than 2.5µm in aerodynamic diameter) is associated with various adverse health outcomes. Many efforts have been made to develop PM2.5 prediction models using satellite-derived aerosol optical depth (AOD) to take advantage of its comprehensive spatiotemporal coverage. However, those models are generally built on regional scales. To date, attempts to develop models to predict PM2.5 concentrations in the conterminous U.S. has not been seen in literature probably because of the difficulties of building such a model that can adapt to a great variety of meteorological conditions and land covers. In this study, we combined the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) dark target and deep blue AOD to increase the spatiotemporal coverage. A three-stage model was developed to predict spatiotemporal-resolved PM2.5 concentrations in the conterminous U.S. using MODIS AOD as the primary predictor and meteorological fields and land use variables as secondary predictors. The first two stages, including a linear mixed effects model and geographically weighted regression, account for the spatiotemporal relationship between PM2.5 and AOD, and the third stage generalized additive model was developed to predict PM2.5 concentrations in areas where AOD is missing. The results show that model fitting generated R2 of 0.60 and RMSPE of 4.23 μg/m3, indicating a good fit between the dependent variable and predictor variables. The spatial pattern shows that high PM2.5 concentrations occur in big cities such as the Houston metro area, and the eastern U.S. is more polluted than western regions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86422", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86424" } }
{"authors":"Kuang-Yu Chang::University of California Davis--Kyaw Tha Paw U::University of California Davis--Shu-Hua Chen::University of California Davis--", "title":"B33C-0709: The Integration of Ecological processes into a Multi-layer Higher order closure Land Surface Model", "abstract":"The ecological impacts on biogeophysical and biogeochemical processes were investigated by a series of simulations conducted by a multi-layer higher order closure land surface model (UCD-ACASA) driven by a variety of meteorological and ecological conditions. The results show that the implementation of a more realistic ecological dataset, once carefully quality controlled, can significantly improve the biogeophysical and biogeochemical simulations, which suggests that the ecological impacts on surface layer simulations are as important as the reliability of the selected land surface model. Therefore, the ability to simulate realistic ecological conditions is imperative and beneficial to improve weather and climate simulations. We coupled the ecological processes in UCD-ACASA by adapting the fully prognostic plant carbon and nitrogen dynamics from the version 4.5 of the Community Land Model (CLM4.5). The simulated ecological conditions are sensitive to both radiative transfer processes and leaf distribution inside the canopy, and the multi-layer feature built in UCD-ACASA enables it to describe these properties more realistically as compared to the other big-leaf models. We conducted another set of simulations to examine the reliability of the simulated biogeophysical, biogeochemical and ecological results. The simulated Leaf Area Index (LAI) was compared with a high resolution remotely sensed LAI dataset, and the results show that the simulated LAI tends to overestimate mean LAI and underestimate annual LAI variation at the selected sites. However, the simulated LAI is reasonable enough to produce comparable simulation results against the simulations driven directly by remotely sensed LAI for the tested biogeophysical and biogeochemical fluxes. The results show that ecological impacts on biogeophysical and biogeochemical simulations are significant, and the implementation of biogeochemical processes into a land surface model has the potential to improve weather and climate simulations by avoiding the inaccurate surface feedback mechanisms from static vegetation distribution.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86424", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86425" } }
{"authors":"Fulvia Pucci::University of Rome Tor Vergata--Marco Velli::University of California Los Angeles--Anna Tenerani::University of California Los Angeles--", "title":"SH43A-2430: Ideal Tearing in the Hall Regime", "abstract":"Magnetic reconnection is generally believed to be the mechanism that explains explosive events in astrophysical plasmas, such as flares in the solar corona, substorms. One of the main questions which remains concerns how magnetic reconnection may account for the fast magnetic energy conversion to kinetic and thermal energies. Recently it has been shown by Pucci and Velli (2014) that, assuming that current sheets scales as different powers of the magnetic Reynolds number S, the growth rate of the tearing mode instability in current sheets increases as the sheets thin and, once the thickness reaches a scaling a/L ∼ S−1/3, the time scale for the instability to develop becomes of the order of the Alfvén time. In Hall reconnection, dispersive waves introduced by the Hall effect make the energy release rates faster. This effect becomes important to the collisional tearing mode instability when the thickness of magnetic reversal layer is comparable to the ion inertia length, where Hall currents produce a three-dimensional quadrupole structure of magnetic field. Here we present a linear study aiming to show how an ` ideal tearing mode`  is achieved when Hall effects are included, including scaling laws for sheet aspect ratios and growth rates.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86425", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86426" } }
{"authors":"Justin Deighan::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--Michael Chaffin::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--Jean-Yves Chaufray::LATMOS Laboratoire Atmosphères, Milieux, Observations Spatiales--Nicholas Schneider::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--Sonal Jain::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--Arnaud Stiepen::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--Matteo Crismani::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--John Clarke::Boston University--Ian Stewart::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--William McClintock::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--Gregory Holsclaw::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--Franck Montmessin::LATMOS Laboratoire Atmosphères, Milieux, Observations Spatiales--Ed Thiemann::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--Phillip Chamberlin::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Bruce Jakosky::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--Francis Eparvier::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--", "title":"P12A-05: The Hot Oxygen Corona of Mars: Observations by MAVEN IUVS", "abstract":"Observation of the Martian hot oxygen corona is an important but difficult measurement in planetary science. These energetic oxygen atoms are thought to be primarily produced by dissociative recombination of O2+ in the planet's ionosphere. While the corona is dominated by gravitationally bound particles, the fraction capable of escaping the planet is expected to be the major pathway for oxygen escape from Mars at the present time. Thus, observing the hot oxygen corona provides valuable insight into the planet’s atmospheric evolution. Up until now, characterization of this population has been elusive due to its extremely tenuous nature. We present here altitude profiles of the hot oxygen corona collected by the MAVEN IUVS instrument as part of its investigation of atmospheric escape from Mars. These measurements confirm the presence of this long anticipated feature of the Martian exosphere, and offer an invaluable way of probing the mechanisms driving escape of atomic oxygen at the present day. Correlation with MAVEN EUVM measurements suggests a relationship between coronal density and solar photoionizing flux, supporting the expectation that dissociative recombination in the ionosphere is the primary source of hot oxygen at Mars. The quality and quantity of the dataset provides valuable constraints for the coronal modeling community, and preliminary comparison of the observed gross structure with a Monte Carlo model is presented.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86426", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86428" } }
{"authors":"Kibrewossen Tesfagiorgis::BMCC/CUNY--", "title":"NH51B-1889: An Operational Tool for Global Monitoring of Inundation Using NPP ATMS Data", "abstract":"The goal of this study is to introduce an operational microwave-based tool for the detection and monitoring of inundation across the globe using passive microwave observations from the Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder (ATMS) sensor onboard SUOMI NPP. ATMS surface sensitive channels, namely, the 23 GHz and the 89 GHz are used in this study. The inundation detection approach is based on the analysis of the standardized anomalies of a soil wetness index that is determined from the gradient between 89 and 23 GHz brightness temperatures. The dimensionless index is sensitive to extreme wetness conditions. Appropriate threshold-based techniques were implemented in the developed tool to detect and eliminate rainy pixels as well as snow and ice covered pixels. An automated tool was developed to process, analyze the data, develop the inundation product, and disseminate the detected inundated area through a web-based interface.  The outputs of the developed algorithm were verified against records from the Darthmouth Flood Observatory data archive. The agreement was acceptable with POD reaching 80 % globally for flood with durations longer than 5 days. The analysis of the flood records showed that the most frequent flood events have a duration of 3 days. The flood detection and mapping system was able to reports more short duration events that lasted 1 day or less than what is in the flood observatory records. The inundation global mapping tool was deployed operationally using real time readouts from NOAA-CREST satellite receiving station in New York, USA.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86428", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86429" } }
{"authors":"Wyatt Hartman::Joint Genome Institute--Rongzhong Ye::University of California, Davis--William Horwath::University of California, Davis--Susannah Tringe::Joint Genome Institute--", "title":"B21D-0497: Coupling of Belowground Carbon Cycling and Stoichiometry from Organisms to Ecosystems along a Soil C Gradient Under Rice Cultivation", "abstract":"Ecological stoichiometry is a framework linking biogeochemical cycles to organism functional traits that has been widely applied in aquatic ecosystems, animals and plants, but is poorly explored in soil microbes. We evaluated relationships among soil stoichiometry, carbon (C) cycling, and microbial community structure and function along a soil gradient spanning ~5-25% C in cultivated rice fields with experimental nitrogen (N) amendments. We found rates of soil C turnover were associated with nutrient stoichiometry and phosphorus (P) availability at ecosystem, community, and organism scales. At the ecosystem scale, soil C turnover was highest in mineral soils with lower C content and N:P ratios, and was positively correlated with soil inorganic P. Effects of N fertilization on soil C cycling also appeared to be mediated by soil P availability, while microbial community composition (by 16S rRNA sequencing) was not altered by N addition. Microbial communities varied along the soil C gradient, corresponding with highly covariant soil %C, N:P ratios, C quality, and carbon turnover. In contrast, we observed unambiguous shifts in microbial community function, imputed from taxonomy and directly assessed by shotgun sequenced metagenomes. The abundance of genes for carbohydrate utilization decreased with increasing soil C (and declining C turnover), while genes for aromatic C uptake, N fixation and P scavenging increased along with potential incorporation of C into biomass pools. Ecosystem and community-scale associations between C and nutrient substrate availability were also reflected in patterns of resource allocation among individual genomes (imputed and assembled). Microbes associated with higher rates of soil C turnover harbored more genes for carbohydrate utilization, fewer genes for obtaining energetically costly forms of C, N and P, more ribosomal RNA gene copies, and potentially lower C use efficiency. We suggest genome clustering by functional gene suites might yield simplified guilds related to biogeochemical cycling, even when function is imputed directly from taxonomy. Our findings in a controlled model wetland ecosystem bolster evidence for the role of P in influencing soil C cycling, and our approach could be leveraged to reduce complex microbial data for trait-based modeling of soil C cycling.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86429", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86431" } }
{"authors":"Maxwell Dahlquist::University of Southern California--A. Joshua West::University of Southern California--", "title":"T33A-2938: Controls on the Evolution of River Channel Morphology on Volcanic Islands", "abstract":"River channel morphology is thought to record the interaction of climatic and tectonic drivers of erosion, together with material properties of bedrock and the temporal changes in each of these parameters. However, unraveling the geophysical story told by river networks is complicated by the complexity of the interactions involved and the impracticality of making observations of river network evolution in situ over geological time scales. In this work, we exploit spatial gradients in an effort to understand fundamental controls on river channel morphology in volcanic terrains. We focus primarily on the Banda Arc, a complex tectonic domain with tectonic, volcanic, and climatic gradients that produce islands with river network geometries in a variety of stages and styles of evolution. We compute the Χ statistic – an integration of upstream drainage area over the length of a river – for rivers draining the Banda Arc islands, focusing on the currently and formerly active volcanic islands of the Arc. We compare Χ plots from across the Banda Arc with those from the Hawaiian Islands, which offer a time series of evolving river networks on volcanic islands of similar composition and a more stable tectonic domain to gain improved understanding of the role of tectonics and time in river network evolution. We find major disequilibria across main drainage divides in extinct volcanic terrains with little tectonic activity, as networks are forced away from their initial radial patterns by variations in lithology and/or climate. Tectonically active islands in the Banda Arc have generally smaller disequilibria across divides and produce more regular drainage patterns, indicating that, at the scale of individual volcanic islands, the tectonic signal may dominate in channel morphology.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86431", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86432" } }
{"authors":"Asmita Shukla::University of Florida--Sanjay Shukla::University of Florida--Alan Hodges::University of Florida--", "title":"H13D-1581: PHOSPHORUS RETENTION BY STORMWATER DETENTION AREAS: ESTIMATION, ENHANCEMENT, AND ECONOMICS", "abstract":"Stormwater detention areas (SDAs) are considered an important best management practice (BMP) both in agricultural and urban areas. In sub-tropical Florida where sandy soils and shallow water table make the nutrient leaching losses from agricultural areas inevitable, the SDAs are relied upon as a last point of treatment. Field-measured water and phosphorus (P) fluxes from an agricultural SDA showed that contrary to generally held view, the SDA was a source of P for the first year (retention efficiency = -12%). For the next year, the SDA served as a sink (54%). The source function of the SDA was a combined effect of high rainfall, dilution of agricultural drainage with rainfall from a tropical storm, and legacy-based soil P saturation. Volume reduction was the main reason for P retention because of no remaining P sorption capacity in the soil in most of the SDA area. Although a net sink of P for Year 2, an event-wise analysis showed the SDA to be a source of P for three out of seven outflow events in Year 2 indicating P release from soil. Because surface P treatment efficiency during both years was either less than or approximately the same as surface water retention efficiency, volume reduction and not sorption or biological assimilation controlled P retention. Hydraulic (e.g. increased storage), managerial (biomass harvesting) and chemical (alum treatment) modifications were evaluated by using a stormwater treatment model and field data. The model was successfully field-verified using well accepted performance measures (e.g. Nash-Sutcliffe efficiency). Maximum additional P retention was shown to be achieved by biomass harvesting (>100%) followed by chemical treatment (71%), and increased spillage level (29%). Economic feasibility of the aforementioned modifications and development of a payment for environmental services (PES) program was identified through a cost-benefit analysis for maintaining these SDAs as sink of P in the long-term. ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86432", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86433" } }
{"authors":"Monica Long::Texas A & M University College Station--Gretchen Miller::Texas A & M University College Station--Guy Fipps::Texas A & M University College Station--Charles Swanson::Texas A & M University College Station--Seydou Traore::Texas A & M University College Station--", "title":"H21J-1546: Spatiotemporal Variability in Potential Evapotranspiration across an Urban Monitoring Network", "abstract":"Evapotranspiration in urban and peri-urban environments is difficult to measure and predict. Barriers to accurate assessment include: the wide range of microclimates caused by urban canyons, heat islands, and park cooling; limited instrument fetch; and the patchwork of native soils, engineered soils, and hardscape. These issues combine to make an accurate assessment of the urban water balance difficult, as evapotranspiration calculations require accurate meteorological data. This study examines nearly three years of data collected by a network of 18 weather stations in Dallas, Texas, designed to measure potential evapotranspiration (ETo) in support of the WaterMyYard conservation program (http://WaterMyYard.org). Variability amongst stations peaked during the summer irrigation months, with a maximum standard deviation of 0.3 mm/hr and 4 mm/d. However, we found a significant degree of information overlap in the network. Most stations had a high correlation (>0.75) with at least one other station in the network, and many had a high correlation with at least 10 others. Correlation strength between station ETo measurements did not necessarily decrease with Euclidean distance, as expected, but was more closely related to differences in station elevation and longitude. Stations that had low correlations with others in the network typically had siting and fetch issues. ETo showed a strong temporal persistence; average station autocorrelation was 0.79 at a 1-hour lag and 0.70 at a 24-hour lag. To supplement the larger-scale network data, we deployed a mobile, vehicle-mounted weather station to quantify deviations present in the atmospheric drivers of evapotranspiration: temperature, humidity, wind, and solar radiation. Data were collected at mid-day during the irrigation season. We found differences in mobile and station ETo predictions up to 0.2 mm/hr, primarily driven by wind speed variations. These results suggest that ETo variation at the neighborhood to municipality level may be as important as variations at the scale of the Metroplex for determining watering requirements. We are currently exploring the use of the Landsat8 thermal infrared sensor (TIRS) to characterize variations in land surface temperature and NDVI, which may help us better predict ETo at this important intermediate scale.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86433", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86434" } }
{"authors":"Paul Duffy::Neptune and Company--Michael Keller::US Forest Service San Juan--Douglas Morton::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--David Schimel::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"GC11B-1040: Impacts of Sample Design on Estimation of Aboveground Biomass: Implications for the Assimilation of Lidar and Forest Inventory Data", "abstract":"The availability of lidar data that can be used to characterize forest structure and estimate aboveground biomass (AGB) is rapidly increasing. When lidar data are considered in conjunction with forest inventory data to estimate AGB, the order of acquisition for these data products may impact the quality of the resulting estimates. In this work, we address this question in the context of uncertainty reduction with respect to estimation of AGB in a degraded forest in Paragominas, Brazil. We have developed a simulation framework that quantitatively assesses the uncertainty associated with estimation of AGB for different sampling strategies that combine forest inventory and lidar data. We utilize a Bayesian hierarchical modeling (BHM) data assimilation framework to combine information from the forest inventory and lidar data products into a higher order data product of AGB. Spatially explicit realizations of AGB are generated under different sampling strategies. Sampling strategies are assessed using the distributional properties of the assimilated higher order data product in the context of uncertainty reduction. We consider both spatially explicit maps of uncertainty as well as the standard deviation of the posterior predictive distributions of AGB as endpoints for the quantification of uncertainty. This framework allows for the explicit characterization of important sources of uncertainty. Our results show that a significant reduction in the uncertainty associated with estimation of AGB can be realized when design optimization is utilized in this context.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86434", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86435" } }
{"authors":"Timothy Scheibe::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Xiaofan Yang::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Yashar Mehmani::Stanford University--William Perkins::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Andrea Pasquali::Technische Universitat Braunschweig--Martin Schoenherr::Technische Universitat Braunschweig--Kyungjoo Kim::Sandia National Laboratories--Mauro Perego::Sandia National Laboratories--Michael Parks::Sandia National Laboratories--Nathaniel Trask::Brown University--Matthew Balhoff::University of Texas at Austin--Marshall Richmond::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Martin Geier::Technische Universitat Braunschweig--Manfred Krafczyk::Technische Universitat Braunschweig--Li-Shi Luo::Old Dominion University--Alexandre Tartakovsky::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--", "title":"B43B-0545: Benchmark Study of 3D Pore-scale Flow and Solute Transport Simulation Methods", "abstract":"Multiple numerical approaches have been developed to simulate porous media fluid flow and solute transport at the pore scale. These include 1) methods that explicitly model the three-dimensional geometry of pore spaces and 2) methods that conceptualize the pore space as a topologically consistent set of stylized pore bodies and pore throats. In previous work we validated a model of the first type, using computational fluid dynamics (CFD) codes employing standard finite volume method (FVM), against magnetic resonance velocimetry (MRV) measurements of pore-scale velocities. Here we expand that benchmark study to include additional models of the first type based on the immersed-boundary method (IMB), lattice Boltzmann method (LBM), and smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH), as well as a model of the second type, a pore-network model (PNM). While the PNM approach is computationally much less demanding than direct numerical simulation methods, the effect of conceptualizing complex three-dimensional pore geometries in the manner of PNMs has not been fully determined. We apply all five approaches (FVM-based CFD, IMB, LBM, SPH and PNM) to simulate pore-scale velocity distributions and nonreactive solute transport, and intercompare the model results. Comparisons are drawn both in terms of macroscopic variables (e.g., permeability, solute breakthrough curves) and microscopic variables (e.g., local velocities and concentrations). Generally good agreement was achieved among the various approaches, but some differences were observed depending on the model context. The benchmark study was challenging because of variable capabilities of the codes, and inspired some code enhancements to allow consistent comparison of flow and transport simulations across the full suite of methods. This study provides support for confidence in a variety of pore-scale modeling methods, and motivates further development and application of pore-scale simulation methods.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86435", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86436" } }
{"authors":"Tiffany Anderson::University of Hawaii at Manoa--", "title":"NH51C-1916: Modeling Coastal Erosion, Passive Inundation, and Dynamic Wave Inundation under Higher Sea Level in Hawaii", "abstract":"Hawaii State legislators recently formed the Interagency Committee on Climate Adaptation to investigate community vulnerability to sea level rise. We developed modeling to provide the committee with assessments of exposure to coastal erosion, wave inundation, and passive flooding based on the IPCC RCP 8.5 model of sea level rise over the 21st Century. We model the exposure to coastal erosion using a hybrid equilibrium profile model (Anderson et al., 2015) that combines historical rates of shoreline change with a Bruun-type model of beach profile translation. Results are mapped in a GIS showing the 80th percentile probability of potential erosion at years 2030, 2050, 2075, and 2100. Wave inundation is modeled using XBeach. We use a 3 m significant wave height to represent a seasonal high swell event. A separate simulation was run for each heightened sea level (corresponding to the years previously mentioned); which accounts for changes in wave dynamics due to the change in water level over the reef platform. We use a bare earth topo/bathy LiDAR DEM derived from data collected during the 2013 JBLTX survey of the Hawaiian Islands. XBeach modeling is done along one-dimensional profiles spaced 20 m apart. From this, we develop a gridded product of water depth and velocity for use in a vulnerability analysis. Passive inundation due to sea level rise, the so-called ` bath tub`  method, provide estimates of storm drain flooding and groundwater inundation. Our analysis of these three impacts of sea level rise, combined – coastal erosion, wave inundation, and passive flooding – are used with other available data in the FEMA Hazus software to estimate exposure and loss of upland assets.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86436", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86437" } }
{"authors":"Hiroshi Isobe::Kumamoto University--", "title":"MR21C-2630: Oriented crystallographic textures of olivine in quenched silicate melt spherules", "abstract":"Olivine is one of the most common minerals in the planetary materials including solid Earth and chondritic meteorites. Olivine crystals show characteristic textures in chondrules and micrometeorites (MMs) depending on heating and cooling histories, especially in extraordinary quick cooling rates. We have constructed a fine particle free fall apparatus in a high temperature furnace and carried out crystallization experiments of fine particles with quick heating and quenching (Isobe and Gondo, 2013). The falling particles in the furnace can reach 1400 degrees C within 2 seconds, keep above 1400 degrees C more than 1 second, and are quenched within 1 second. Run products from olivine particles show various textures depending on proportions of three kinds of starting materials in the particles. Fayalite particles melt completely and form barred olivine-like spherules with low pyramid structures on the surface. Dendritic olivine crystals with regulated crystallographic orientation are developed in melted particles. Surface texture of melted particles may be affected by the dendritic olivine crystals grown in the spherules. Oriented dendrites of magnetite also occur between olivine crystals. The texture of oriented dendrite of olivine with tiny magnetite is quite similar to natural cosmic spherules (CSs). In the completely melted spherules, barred olivine-like structures can be seen. Due to extraordinary high cooling rate up to 2×10^6 degrees C/hour and degrees of supercooling, olivine bars show chained structure of H-shaped or hourglass shaped units which are distinctive characteristics for quick growth of olivine in quenching. In spite of quite short period of crystal growth processes, chained olivine aligns parallel bars in the almost entire spherule. Nucleation of barred olivine crystals may be initiated at surface of spherules. Starting points of olivine growth can be seen as peaks on surface of the spherules. The crystallographic textures of olivine develop external and internal textures of silicate melt spherules.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86437", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86438" } }
{"authors":"Melissa Bernardino::University of Colorado Boulder--Craig Jones::University of Colorado at Boulder--William Levandowski::USGS Geologic Hazards Science Center--", "title":"S23C-2712: S-wave tomographic model of the Sierra Nevada, California: Constraining thermal and compositional effects through Vp/Vs, anisotropy, and attenuation", "abstract":"The lithospheric seismic structure of the Sierra Nevada, California has long been recognized as an important tool for determining the uplift mechanism(s) of this range and its effect on the tectonic evolution of the western United States. Past studies have generally observed that at upper mantle depths, the Sierran crest is characterized by slower wavespeeds, suggestive of buoyant material while the western foothills are characterized as regions of faster, more dense material. Although there exists many different tomographic models of the Sierra Nevada, its exact geometry and structure are difficult to constrain and vary. For instance, the high wavespeed Isabella anomaly has been imaged in many different studies and has been interpreted as delaminated lithosphere, convectively downwelling lithosphere, and a remnant slab. Challenges in estimating a tomographic model include discrepancies in data coverage, resolution, and accounting for the effects of anisotropy and attenuation. It is still not well understood whether seismic velocity variations in the Sierra Nevada are thermal or compositional in origin. To address this question, we will use a three-dimensional P- and S-wave tomographic model of the Sierra Nevada and vicinity to characterize its lithospheric thermal and compositional structure. Travel times for direct Sfast and Sslow using regional-to-teleseismic S- and SKS- phases will be measured to invert for Vp, Vp/Vs, and percent anisotropy. Teleseismic P-wave travel times used to calculate Vp and Vp/Vs were measured from a previous study. Vp/Vs and percent anisotropy will be used to evaluate regions where compositional effects are prevalent. Regions with higher anisotropy could be indicative of olivine-rich, strained mantle. However, lower anisotropy could be indicative of isotropic minerals such as eclogite. High Vp/Vs could suggest more garnet and pyroxene or a decrease in Mg. We will also calculate Sfast and Sslow wave differential attenuation, dt*, to evaluate regions where thermal or scattering effects dominate. ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86438", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86439" } }
{"authors":"Amir Caspi::Southwest Research Institute Boulder--James McTiernan::University of California Berkeley--Albert Shih::NASA GSFC--Juan Carlos Martinez Oliveros::Space Sciences Laboratory--Joel Allred::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Harry Warren::Naval Research Lab DC--", "title":"SH22A-08: Energy Release and Transport in Super-Hot Solar Flares", "abstract":"Solar flares efficiently convert the magnetic energy stored in the Sun's complex coronal magnetic field into the kinetic energies of hot plasma, accelerated particles, and bulk flows. In intense flares, up to 10^32-33 ergs can go into heating plasma to tens of MK, accelerating electrons to hundreds of MeV and ions to tens of GeV, and ejecting 10^9-10 kg of coronal material into the heliosphere at thousands of km/s. However, the exact physical mechanisms behind these phenomena are poorly understood. For example, while ` super-hot`  (T > 30 MK) plasma temperatures appear to be common in the most intense, X-class flares, how that plasma is so efficiently heated remains unknown. Current studies favor an in situ heating process for super-hot plasma, versus chromospheric evaporation for cooler plasma, although the specific mechanism is under debate. X-class flares are also often associated with enhanced photospheric/chromospheric white light emission, which is itself poorly understood, and with fast (>1000 km/s) CMEs; super-hot flares are more commonly observed in eruptive two-ribbon arcade flares than in highly-confined events. These phenomena may well have common underlying drivers. We discuss the current understanding of super-hot plasma in solar flares, its formation, and evolution, based on observations from RHESSI, SDO/EVE, SDO/AIA, and other instruments. We discuss the energetics of these events and their relationship to white light enhancement and fast CMEs. We explore the possibility of energy deposition by accelerated ions as a common driver for super-hot plasmas and white light enhancement, and discuss future instrumentation -- both for CubeSats and Explorers -- that will provide a deeper understanding of these phenomena and their interrelationships.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86439", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86440" } }
{"authors":"Robert Jacob::Argonne National Laboratory--Rajesh Sankaran::Argonne National Laboratory--Peter Beckman::Argonne National Laboratory--", "title":"A53A-0373: Using UAV's to Measure the Urban Boundary Layer", "abstract":"The urban boundary layer is one of the most poorly studied regions of the atmospheric boundary layer. Since a majority of the world’s population now lives in urban areas, it is becoming a more important region to measure and model. The combination of relatively low-cost unmanned aerial vehicles and low-cost sensors can together provide a new instrument for measuring urban and other boundary layers. We have mounted a new sensor and compute platform called Waggle on an off-the-shelf XR8 octo-copter from 3DRobotics. Waggle consists of multiple sensors for measuring pressure, temperature and humidity as well as trace gases such as carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide and ozone. A single board computer running Linux included in Waggle on the UAV allows in-situ processing and data storage. Communication of the data is through WiFi or 3G and the Waggle software can save the data in case communication is lost during flight. The flight pattern is a deliberately simple vertical ascent and descent over a fixed location to provide vertical profiles and so flights can be confined to urban parks, industrial areas or the footprint of a single rooftop. We will present results from test flights in urban and rural areas in and around Chicago.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86440", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86441" } }
{"authors":"Alec Armstrong::University of Maryland College Park--Steven Epting::University of Maryland College Park--Jacob Hosen::Yale University--Margaret Palmer::University of Maryland--", "title":"H11E-1387: Tracking Changes in Dissolved Organic Matter Patterns in Perennial Headwater Streams Throughout a Hydrologic Year Using In-situ Sensors and Optical Properties", "abstract":"Dissolved organic matter (DOM) plays a central role in freshwater streams but key questions remain unanswered about temporal patterns in its quantity and composition. DOM in perennial streams in the temperate zone is a complex mixture reflecting a variety of sources such as leached plant material, organic matter from surrounding soils, and microbial processes in the streams themselves. Headwater perennial streams in the Tuckahoe Creek watershed of the Atlantic coastal plain (Maryland, USA) drain a mosaic of land cover types including row crops, forests, and both forested and marshy small depressional wetlands. Wetland-stream surface hydrologic connections generally occur between mid-fall and late spring, coinciding with peak wetland hydrologic expression (i.e. highest groundwater levels and surface inundation extent). When inundated, these wetlands contain high DOM concentrations, and surface connections may serve as conduits for downstream export. We hypothesized that changes in wetland-stream surface hydrologic connectivity would affect patterns of DOM concentration and composition in these streams. We deployed 6 sondes equipped with fluorescent DOM sensors in 4 perennial streams, 1 forested wetland, and the larger downstream channel draining all study sites for the 2015 water year. The 4 headwater streams drain areas containing forested wetlands and have documented temporary channel connections. Combined with baseflow and stormflow sampling, the sondes provided 15 minute estimates of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentrations. This resolution provided insights into patterns of DOC concentration across temporal scales from daily rhythms to seasonal changes, during both baseflow and storm conditions. Discrete measurements of absorbance and fluorescence provided information about DOM composition throughout the study. Together these measurements give a detailed record of DOM dynamics in multiple perennial headwater streams for an entire year. This information could inform future studies, such as investigations into stream network scale thresholds in DOM cycling, carbon cycling modelling for the study region, or understanding the impact of wetlands sometimes considered geographically isolated on downstream ecosystems.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86441", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86442" } }
{"authors":"Misun Kang::University of California Davis--Michael Lerche::University of California Davis--Charles Lesher::University of California Davis--", "title":"H21A-1353: Brine migration in salt in a thermal gradient", "abstract":"Salt deposits have long been considered viable repositories for long-term storage of high-level nuclear waste. However, brine trapped in salt tends to migrate up thermal gradients, such as can develop around radioactive waste storage containers, potentially promoting corrosion of containment structures. Brine inclusions move up the temperature gradient through the three main steps: 1) the dissolution of salt at the hot side of the inclusion caused by increased salt solubility, 2) ordinary and thermal diffusion of dissolved salt ions within the inclusion, and 3) precipitation of salt at the cold side of the inclusion due to local supersaturation. This process of brine transport through salt under a thermal gradient is generally referred to as thermal migration. Here we investigated thermal migration of brine inclusion in salts for a wide range of mean temperatures (~ 50 °C to ~200 °C) and temperature gradients (~ 10 °C/cm to ~57 °C/cm). With time brine inclusions moving towards the heat source become elongated parallel to the thermal gradient. We quantified the rate of brine migration as a function of mean temperature and thermal gradient using time-lapse optical microscope. X -ray and neutron tomography were used to visualize and quantify 3D spatial distribution of brine inclusion in a salt crystal at different stages of thermal migration. Migration velocities are shown to increase with temperature, temperature gradient and size of inclusion. We find an abrupt increase in migration velocity at certain time steps of thermal migration. Migration velocities of brine inclusions ranged from 0.1 m/year to 30.7 m/year. Empirical equations at different velocity regions for brine inclusions were obtained by fitting exponential equations to the experimental data with high coefficient of determination values (R2> 0.94).The experimental results are in good agreement with the theoretical migration rates obtained using a previous analytical model.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86442", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86443" } }
{"authors":"Habibollah Fakhraei::Syracuse University--", "title":"B13G-0718: Developing Critical Loads of acidity for streams in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, using PnET-BGC model", "abstract":"Acid deposition has impaired acid-sensitive streams and reduced aquatic biotic integrity in Great Smoky Mountains National Park (GRSM) by decreasing pH and acid neutralizing capacity (ANC). Twelve streams in GRSM are listed by the state of Tennessee as impaired due to low stream pH (pH<6.0) under Section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act. A dynamic biogeochemical model, PnET-BGC, was used to evaluate past, current and potential future changes in soil and water chemistry of watersheds of GRSM in response to changes in acid deposition. Calibrating 30 stream-watersheds in GRSM (including 12 listed impaired streams) to the long-term stream chemistry observations, the model was parameterized for the Park. The calibrated model was used to evaluate the level of atmospheric deposition above which harmful effects occur, known as “critical loads”, for individual study watersheds. Estimated critical loads and exceedances (levels of deposition above the critical load) of atmospheric sulfur and nitrogen deposition were depicted through geographic information system maps. Accuracy of model simulations in the presence of uncertainties in the estimated model parameters and inputs was assessed using three uncertainty and sensitivity techniques.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86443", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86444" } }
{"authors":"Christopher Tennant::Idaho State University--Adrian Harpold::University of Nevada Reno--Kathleen Lohse::Idaho State University--Benjamin Crosby::Idaho State University--Sarah Godsey::Idaho State University--Laurel Larsen::University of California Berkeley--Robert Van Kirk::Humboldt State University--", "title":"C33C-0826: LiDAR illuminates the influence of elevation, aspect, and vegetation on seasonal snowpack: case studies from four western Critical Zone Observatories", "abstract":"Warming can alter hydrologic regimes in snow dominated areas by increasing the proportion of rain to snow and by expanding the extent, density, and activity of vegetation. We evaluate the present-day influence of elevation, aspect, and forest cover on the spatial distribution of seasonal snow accumulation using five snow-on and snow-off Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) datasets from four Critical Zone Observatories (CZO) across the western U.S. All sites exhibit increases in snow depth with elevation; however, the relationship between snow depth and elevation is not monotonic and varies from site to site. Most sites demonstrate a decline in snowpack at the highest elevations, suggesting either orographic exhaustion, wind scour or low retention on high slopes. The elevation distributions in each dataset generally predict snow volume distributions with high accuracy, implying that hypsometry alone provides a useful measure of a watershed’s coarse-scale sensitivity to warming-driven snowpack loss. When analyzed at finer scales, we find that elevation weakly predicts snow storage at Boulder and Reynolds CZOs where wind transport, aspect and vegetation dependent snow storage are significant. Though mean snow depths on northern aspects in open areas in most sites are two to five times greater than in forested areas, Reynolds Creek’s sparse patches of forest are attractors, maintaining snow depths seven times greater than in open areas. Our results emphasize that the relation between elevation and snow depth is robust when working at basin-averaged or regional scales but at finer scales, topographic complexity and vegetation produce a diverse array of local snow accumulation patterns.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86444", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86445" } }
{"authors":"Henry Hsieh::Planetary Science Institute Tucson--", "title":"P52A-01: The Reactivation of Main-Belt Comet 324P/La Sagra", "abstract":"We present observations using the Baade Magellan and Canada-France-Hawaii telescopes showing that main-belt comet 324P/La Sagra, also known as P/2010 R2, has become active again for the first time since originally observed to be active in 2010-2011. The object appears point-source-like in March and April 2015 as it approached perihelion (true anomaly of ν~300 deg), but was ~0.8-1.1 mag brighter than expected if inactive, suggesting the presence of unresolved dust emission. Activity was confirmed by observations of a cometary dust tail in May and June 2015. We find an apparent net dust production rate of M_d ~ 0.2 kg/s during these observations. 324P is now the fourth main-belt comet confirmed to be recurrently active, a strong indication that its activity is driven by sublimation. It now has the largest confirmed active range of all likely main-belt comets, and also the most distant confirmed inbound activation point at R~2.8 AU. We will also discuss the implications of the growing number of main-belt comets with confirmed recurrent activity and opportunities for confirming recurrent activity in other suspected main-belt comets.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86445", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86446" } }
{"authors":"Chris Gregg::National Disaster Preparedness Training Center--Bruce Houghton::University of Hawaii at Manoa--Karl Kim::National Disaster Preparedness Training Center--", "title":"NH13A-1914: Response To And Lessons Learned From Two Back-To-Back Disasters At Kilauea Volcano, Puna District, Hawaii", "abstract":"The Puna District, Hawaii, is exposed to many natural hazards, including those associated with volcanic eruptions and tropical storms, but for decades Puna has also been the fastest growing District in the state due to its affordable real estate. In 2014, populated areas were affected by back-to-back hurricane and volcanic eruption crises. Both events were declared Presidential Disasters and tested response and recovery systems of many of Puna’s 49, 000 residents, government services and businesses. This paper summarizes individual and organizational response to the two crises: the relatively rapid onset Tropical Storm Iselle, which made landfall in Puna on August 5 and the slow onset June 27 lava flow. The latter took some 2 months to advance to the edge of developed areas, prompting widespread community reaction. While the lava flows no longer pose an immediate threat to development because they are repaving remote, near-source and upflow areas, the lava could again advance into developed areas over similar time scales as in 2014. Puna is mostly a rural setting with many narrow, privately owned dirt roads. Some residents have no municipal electricity and water; they use solar and gasoline generators and rain catchment systems. High winds and collapse of exotic Albizia trees during Iselle isolated many residents, but people self-organized through social media to respond and recover. Social media and community meetings dominated information sharing during the lava crisis. Major expenses were incurred in response to the lava crisis, primarily through upgraded alternate roads that provide redundancy and construction of temporary school buildings linked to evacuation and relocation of students. Experiences during Iselle primed residents to rapidly self-organize and address the impending inundation by slow moving lava flows which advanced in uncertain directions at rates of 0-450 m/day. People’s demand for constant and near-real time information from authorities placed enormous demands on all official agencies’ (scientific, civil defense, education, public works, transportation). We close with discussions of lessons learned from a tropical storm disaster with widespread, punctuated physical impacts and a long-onset lava flow disaster with comparatively no physical impacts, but high costs.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86446", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86447" } }
{"authors":"Matthew Forrest::Scripps Institution of Oceanography--David Hilton::University of California San Diego--Roy Price::Stony Brook University--Justin Kulongoski::USGS California Water Science Center San Diego--", "title":"OS22C-04: Shallow Water Hydrothermal Vents in the Gulf of California: Natural Laboratories for Multidisciplinary Research", "abstract":"Modern and fossil examples of shallow water submarine hydrothermal vents occur throughout the Gulf of California. These sites offer important information about the processes involved in the extensional tectonics that created the Gulf of California and continue to shape the region to this day. Due to their accessibility, shallow water marine hydrothermal vents are far easier to access and study than their deeper analogs, and these settings can provide natural laboratories to study biogeochemical processes. Certain biogeochemical and biomineralizing processes occurring at shallow vents are very similar to those observed around deep-sea hydrothermal vents. In some cases, authigenic carbonates form around shallow vents. However, the hydrothermal precipitates are generally composed of Fe-oxyhydroxides, Mn-oxides, opal, calcite, pyrite and cinnabar, and their textural and morphological characteristics suggest microbial mediation for mineral deposition. Modern shallow-water hydrothermal vents also support complex biotic communities, characterized by the coexistence of chemosynthetic and photosynthetic organisms. These shallow vents are highly productive and provide valuable resources to local fishermen. Extant shallow water hydrothermal activity has been studied in Bahía Concepción, San Felipe, Punta Estrella, El Coloradito, Puertecitos, and around the Islas Encantadas. Discrete streams of gas bubbles are often discharged along with hot liquids at shallow water vents. The vent liquids generally exhibit lower salinities than seawater, and their isotopic compositions indicate that they contain meteoric water mixed with seawater. The composition of the shallow vent gas is primarily made up of CO2, but may also be enriched in N2, H2S, CH4, and other higher hydrocarbons. The geochemistry of these gases can be informative in determining the sources and processes involved in their generation. In particular, 3He/4He ratios may provide valuable information about the origin of the gas, as 3He is an extremely sensitive geochemical tracer for detecting mantle-derived volatiles. Here we will discuss the biogeochemical processes occurring around shallow water vents and will also present new unpublished gas geochemistry data from shallow vents near the Islas Encantadas in the northern Gulf of California.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86447", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86448" } }
{"authors":"Carol Beaver::Western Michigan University--Dimitrios Ntarlagiannis::Rutgers University Newark--Christine Kimak::Rutgers Univ--Lee Slater::Rutgers Univ--Estella Atekwana::Oklahoma State University Main Campus--Silvia Rossbach::Western Michigan University--", "title":"B51C-0440: Use of the Complex Conductivity Method to Monitor Hydrocarbon Degradation in Brackish Environments", "abstract":"Hydrocarbon contamination of the subsurface is a global environmental problem. The size, location and recurrence rate of contamination very often inhibits active remediation strategies. When there is no direct threat to humans, and direct/invasive remediation methods are prohibited, monitored natural attenuation is often the remediation method of choice. Consequently, long-term monitoring of hydrocarbon degradation is needed to validate remediation. Geophysical methods, frequently utilized to characterize subsurface contamination, have the potential to be adopted for long term monitoring of contaminant degradation. Over the last decade, the complex conductivity method has shown promise as a method for monitoring hydrocarbon degradation processes in freshwater environments. We investigated the sensitivity of complex conductivity to natural attenuation of oil in a brackish setting, being more representative of the conditions where most oil spills occur such as in coastal environments. We performed a series of laboratory hydrocarbon biodegradation experiments whilst continuously monitoring complex conductivity. Sediments from a beach impacted by the Deepwater Horizon (DWH) spill were used to provide the hydrocarbon degraders, while fluids with three different salinities, ranging from fresh water to brackish water, were used as the supporting media. All experimental columns, including two abiotic controls, were run in duplicate. Early results show a dependence of the complex conductivity parameters (both electrolytic and interfacial) on biodegradation processes. Despite the small signals relative to freshwater conditions, the imaginary part of the complex conductivity appears to be sensitive to biodegradation processes. The columns with highest salinity fluids - similar to the salinites for the site where the sediments were collected - showed distinctive complex conductivity responses similar to microbial growth curves. Geochemical monitoring confirmed elevated rates of hydrocarbon degradation in these two columns. Microbial monitoring confirmed the presence of hydrocarbon degraders; early results from molecular analysis of the column sediments suggests that the salinity of the supporting fluids favored the growth of different microbial communities.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86448", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86449" } }
{"authors":"Shawn Brooks::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Linda Spilker::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"P51B-2067: Towards an Understanding of Thermal Throughput across Saturn's Rings with Cassini CIRS", "abstract":"One of the more striking aspects of Saturn's main ring system is its aspect ratio. It spans over 270,000 km from ansa to ansa, yet its thickness normal to the ring plane is less than a million times its breadth. Hence, studies of the rings’ structure focus mostly on radial and azimuthal features. But in the thermal infrared the vertical thickness of the main rings is clearly manifest in the measured temperature differences between that face of the rings exposed to direct solar illumination (the lit face) and the opposite (unlit) face derived from observations with Cassini's Composite Infrared Spectrometer (CIRS). Ferrari et al. (2013) and Pilorz et al. (2015) have recently published insightful and thorough analyses of the thermal throughput across the optically thick B ring. The ultimate goal of this work is to understand these lit/unlit temperature differentials and their variation with radius and optical depth across the entire ring system. As previous work has shown (Spilker et al., 2006), the thermal flux from Saturn’s rings observed by CIRS is a function of observing geometry. To control for these variations, we designed paired observations of the lit and unlit rings where observing variables such as the emission, phase and local hour angles were kept as similar as possible to facilitate direct comparison between the lit and unlit observations. Constraining the amount of thermal energy exchange between the lit and unlit sides of the rings will allow us to learn about the main rings' structure and dynamics in this third dimension. This presentation is a progress report on our analysis of such observations and our plans for future work. This research was carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under contract with NASA. Copyright 2015 California Institute of Technology. Government sponsorship acknowledged.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86449", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86450" } }
{"authors":"Nicholas Sutfin::Colorado State University--Ellen Wohl::Colorado State University--", "title":"EP33B-1069: Differences in mean floodplain sediment turnover time associated with distinct hydroclimatic disturbance regimes in the Colorado Front Range", "abstract":"Residence time of floodplain sediment in mountainous streams influences carbon and nutrient dynamics, riparian and aquatic ecosystems, sediment yield, long-term exhumation rate, and landscape evolution. We hypothesize that differences in hydroclimatic regime on a longitudinal gradient in the Colorado Front Range result in more rapid floodplain sediment turnover rate at elevations below 2300 m. Differences in hydroclimatic regimes along the Front Range result from increased frequency and magnitude of large convective thunderstorms below 2300-m elevation. Differences in precipitation and cumulative effects of larger contributing drainage areas at lower elevations result in increased magnitude of floodplain disturbances. We use randomly selected radiocarbon ages of charcoal from the subsurface of floodplains 2 – 6 times the bankfull channel width to estimate mean floodplain sediment turnover time along three study reaches in the North Saint Vrain Creek watershed. Study reaches at 2930 m, 2360 m, and 2220 m in elevation, with drainage areas of 10.1 km2, 96 km2, and 200 km2, have mean calibrated radiocarbon ages of 1338 ± 297, 527 ± 350, and 843 ± 589 y BP, respectively. Floodplain sediment turnover time, calculated by dividing the mass of the stored sediment by the mean radiocarbon age, result in estimates of 1, 8.1, and 7.5 g/100 y from high to low elevation sites, respectively. No observed floodplain disturbance other than overbank flow and aggradation occurred at 11 study sites above 2300 m, whereas delineation of lateral floodplain erosion from pre- and post-event aerial imagery and post-2013 flood LiDAR indicate ~15 ha of floodplain erosion below 2300 m. Preliminary results from the 10 charcoal samples suggest support for our hypothesis, but 16 – 20 additional radiocarbon ages currently being processed will reduce uncertainty associated with limited samples and confounding probability of “old” charcoal being incorporated into sites with larger drainage areas.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86450", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86451" } }
{"authors":"Daniel Harris::MARUM - University of Bremen--Alessio Rovere::Lamont -Doherty Earth Observatory--Valeriano Parravicini::EPHE - Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes--Elisa Casella::University of Genoa--", "title":"EP23B-0965: Linking Wave Forcing to Coral Cover and Structural Complexity Across Coral Reef Flats", "abstract":"The hydrodynamic regime is a significant component in the geomorphic and ecological development of coral reefs. The energy gradients and flow conditions generated by the breaking and transformation of waves across coral reef crests and flats drive changes in geomorphic structure, and coral growth form and distribution. One of the key aspects in regulating the wave energy propagating across reef flats is the rugosity or roughness of the benthic substrate. Rugosity and structural complexity of coral reefs is also a key indicator of species diversity, ecological functioning, and reef health. However, the links between reef rugosity, coral species distribution and abundance, and hydrodynamic forcing are poorly understood. In this study we examine this relationship by using high resolution measurement of waves in the surf zone and coral reef benthic structure. Pressure transducers (logging at 4 Hz) were deployed in cross reef transects at two sites (Tiahura and Ha’apiti reef systems) in Moorea, French Polynesia with wave characteristics determined on a wave by wave basis. A one dimensional hydrodynamic model (XBeach) was calibrated from this data to determine wave processes on the reef flats under average conditions. Transects of the reef benthic structure were conducted using photographic analysis and the three dimensional reef surface was constructed using structure from motion procedures. From this analysis reef rugosity, changes in coral genus and growth form, and across reef shifts in benthic community were determined. The results show clear changes in benthic assemblages along wave energy gradients with some indication of threshold values of wave induced bed shear stress above which live coral cover was reduced. Reef rugosity was shown to be significantly along the cross-reef transect which has important implications for accurate assessment of wave dissipation across coral reef flats. Links between reef rugosity and coral genus were also observed and may indicate that some coral species are crucial in maintaining the structural diversity of coral reefs.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86451", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86452" } }
{"authors":"Benchun Duan::Texas A & M University College Station--", "title":"T43D-3050: Response of Natural Fractures to Hydraulic Fracturing", "abstract":"We extend a dynamic earthquake rupture simulation code to model propagation of both shear and tensile fractures and seismic waves radiated from these fractures. We particularly aim to explore how pre-existing natural fractures respond to hydraulic fracturing treatment. We use split nodes to define fractures in the finite element mesh. By appropriately implementing jump conditions on the two different types of fractures, we can simulate dynamics propagation of shear and tensile fractures using the finite element code. Shear failure is governed by the Mohr-Coulomb criterion and a slip-weakening friction law dictates friction evolution on shear fractures during shear sliding. Tensile failure occurs when the effective normal stress acting on a fracture reaches tensile strength. In our models, pressurization and propagation of a hydraulic fracture due to fluid injection drive deformation. Our preliminary results show that natural fractures that are parallel or perpendicular to the hydraulic fracture, which are commonly assumed in many hydraulic fracturing models, are unlikely to be activated by hydraulic fracturing, if no natural fractures in other orientations exist. However, activation of natural fractures that are optimally oriented in the initial stress field may trigger sliding or opening of natural fractures in other orientations. These results suggest important roles both static stress and dynamic stress play in response of natural fractures to hydraulic fracturing.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86452", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86453" } }
{"authors":"Martin Nowak::Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry--Thomas Behrendt::Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry--Beto Quesada::National Institute for Amazon Research (INPA)--Ana Maria Yanez Serrano::Max Planck Institute for Chemistry--Susan Trumbore::Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry--", "title":"B41G-0515: The Importance of CO2 Utilizing Chemolithoautotrophic Microorganisms for Carbon Sequestration and Isotope Signatures of SOM in Tropical Rainforest Soils", "abstract":"Soil organic matter (SOM) is a major compartment of the tropical carbon cycle with up to 26 % of global carbon stocks stored in tropical soils. Understanding factors and processes driving SOM dynamics under changing climate conditions is crucial for predicting the role of tropical forest ecosystems to act as a carbon sink or source. Soil microorganisms are major drivers of the belowground carbon cycle by releasing CO2 by soil respiration but also by stabilizing and storing SOM, as indicated by recent research. Our investigations focus on chemolithoautotrophic microorganisms, a group that relies on CO2 as their carbon source. Chemolithoautotrophic microorganisms have been shown to be highly abundant in soils, whereas their role in SOM sequestration is still poorly understood. In tropical soils, the activity of chemolithoautotropic microbes might be important for generating and stabilizing carbon, especially in the deeper soil, which is rich in CO2 and reduced energy sources like Fe2+. They further might impact carbon isotope signatures (13C and 14C) of SOM, because of enzymatic fractionation during carboxylation and the use of carbon, which has a distinct isotopic composition than other carbon sources at the same depth. In order to study the activity of chemolithoautotropic microbes and their importance for SOM, we conducted isotope and isotope–labelling studies, gas measurements as well as molecular analyses at soils from the Atto site from 0 to 1 meter depth. These soils are classified as Ferralsols and Alisols and represent the most abundant soil types in the Amazon. With this we will be able to gain knowledge about the function and identity of an important group of microorganisms and their contribution to crucial biogeochemical cycles in the world`s most important ecosystem.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86453", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86454" } }
{"authors":"Fatima Cipriano::Nationwide Operational Assessment of Hazards (Project NOAH)--Alfredo mahar Lagmay::Nationwide Operational Assessment of Hazards (Project NOAH) University of the Philippines--Matt Horritt::Horritt Consulting--Jerico Mendoza::Nationwide Operational Assessment of Hazards (Project NOAH)--Glenn Sabio::Nationwide Operational Assessment of Hazards (Project NOAH)--Kenneth Niño Punay::---Herbert James Taniza::Nationwide Operational Assessment of Hazards (Project NOAH)--Christopher Uichanco::Nationwide Operational Assessment of Hazards (Project NOAH)--", "title":"H51B-1369: Calibration of Watershed Lag Time Equation for Philippine Hydrology using RADARSAT Digital Elevation Models", "abstract":"Widespread flooding is a major problem in the Philippines. The country experiences heavy amount of rainfall throughout the year and several areas are prone to flood hazards because of its unique topography. Human casualties and destruction of infrastructure are just some of the damages caused by flooding and the Philippine government has undertaken various efforts to mitigate these hazards. One of the solutions was to create flood hazard maps of different floodplains and use them to predict the possible catastrophic results of different rain scenarios. To produce these maps with accurate output, different input parameters were needed and one of those is calculating hydrological components from topographical data. This paper presents how a calibrated lag time (TL) equation was obtained using measurable catchment parameters. Lag time is an essential input in flood mapping and is defined as the duration between the peak rainfall and peak discharge of the watershed. The lag time equation involves three measurable parameters, namely, watershed length (L), maximum potential retention (S) derived from the curve number, and watershed slope (Y), all of which were available from RADARSAT Digital Elevation Models (DEM). This approach was based on a similar method developed by CH2M Hill and Horritt for Taiwan, which has a similar set of meteorological and hydrological parameters with the Philippines. Rainfall data from fourteen water level sensors covering 67 storms from all the regions in the country were used to estimate the actual lag time. These sensors were chosen by using a screening process that considers the distance of the sensors from the sea, the availability of recorded data, and the catchment size. The actual lag time values were plotted against the values obtained from the Natural Resource Conservation Management handbook lag time equation. Regression analysis was used to obtain the final calibrated equation that would be used to calculate the lag time specifically for rivers in the Philippine setting. The calculated lag time values could then be used as a parameter for modeling different flood scenarios in the country.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86454", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86455" } }
{"authors":"Jesse Ambrose::University of Washington--Daniel Jaffe::University of Washington Bothell Campus--", "title":"A41A-0025: A New Method for Accurate Signal Processing in Measurements of Elemental Mercury Vapor by Atomic Fluorescence Spectrophotometry", "abstract":"The most widely used method for quantifying atmospheric Hg is gold amalgamation pre-concentration, followed by thermal desorption (TD) and detection via atomic fluorescence spectrophotometry (AFS). Most AFS-based atmospheric Hg measurements are carried out using commercial analyzers manufactured by Tekran® Instruments Corp. (instrument models 2537A and 2537B). A generally overlooked and poorly characterized source of analytical uncertainty in these measurements is the method by which the raw Hg AFS signal is processed. In nearly all applications of Tekran® analyzers for atmospheric Hg measurements, researchers rely upon embedded software which automatically integrates the Hg TD peaks. However, Swartzendruber et al. (2009; doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2009.02.063) demonstrated that the Hg TD peaks can be more accurately defined, and overall measurement precision increased, by post-processing the raw Hg AFS signal; improvements in measurement accuracy and precision were shown to be more significant at lower sample loadings. Despite these findings, a standardized method for signal post-processing has not been presented. To better characterize uncertainty associated with Tekran® based atmospheric Hg measurements, and to facilitate more widespread adoption of an accurate, standardized signal processing method, we developed a new, distributable Virtual Instrument (VI) which performs semi-automated post-processing of the raw Hg AFS signal from the Tekran® analyzers. Here we describe the key features of the VI and compare its performance to that of the Tekran® signal processing method.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86455", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86456" } }
{"authors":"Jeffrey Severinghaus::Scripps Institution of Oceanography--Jean-Robert Petit::LGGE Laboratoire de Glaciologie et Géophysique de l’Environnement--Joe McConnell::Desert Research Institute--Sarah Shackleton::Scripps Institution of Oceanography--Daniel Baggenstos::University of California San Diego--", "title":"A21L-04: Two-dimensional dust concentration from an outcrop of Last Glacial Maximum ice at Taylor Glacier, Antarctica", "abstract":"An outcrop of ancient glacial ice at Taylor Glacier, Antarctica, provides a unique opportunity to understand dust concentrations in two dimensions - not just downcore as in classical ice cores, but also along-strike in the layers of dust that represent isochronous surfaces. Taylor Glacier hosts dust layers from the Last Glacial Maximum that can be traced visually for several kilometers along strike. The pattern of dust stratigraphy is highly reproducible and allows quick stratigraphic age dating of recognizable features, much as in classical geological field mapping. One striking feature of this record is that Heinrich Stadials are characterized by low dust concentrations, in keeping with prior ice core dust records, but underscored by the visual continuity of the low-dust bands that represent Heinrich Stadials. We hypothesize, following earlier authors, that the low dust is caused by anomalous Patagonian wetness and consequent dust-source reduction, driven by southward shifts of the Earth's thermal equator during Heinrich Stadials. If correct, this hypothesis implies that the bipolar seesaw exists for dust as well as temperature.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86456", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86457" } }
{"authors":"Peter Revelle::New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology--Jan Hendrickx::New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology--", "title":"H31H-1526: Quantifying the Effect of Thinning Vegetation on Evapotranspiration in a Mountainous Watershed through Remote Sensing: Improving Water Balance Estimates for Managed Aquifer Recharge", "abstract":"A long-term water balance study in an experimental watershed of the Sacramento Mountains in New Mexico monitors the impact of thinning vegetation on groundwater recharge. The study objective is to evaluate if thinning forest vegetation will increase groundwater recharge in the mountains to provide larger regional flows to aquifers in surrounding basins. In the semi-arid Southwest, evapotranspiration (ET) makes up 75 to 95% or more of the total water budget. The variability of daily vegetation transpiration and solar radiation with time of year and the effects of complex terrain create a seasonal and spatial variability of ET that is not well quantified in mountainous regions. Through applying the remote sensing model METRIC (Mapping Evapotranspiration with High Resolution and Internalized Calibration) to satellite imagery from the LANDSAT satellite, we calculate high-resolution maps of ET for the Sacramento Mountains watershed area to quantify spatially-distributed estimates of ET before and after thinning to provide improved estimates for determining the water balance and the effect on recharge. METRIC calculates ET through applying an energy balance spatially across an image to estimate ET for each pixel (30m x 30m). Differences in ET are calculated between thinned and control plots in the watershed before and after thinning with the net impact of thinning on ET for an image determined with standard statistical tests following a Before-After Control-Impact (BACI) approach commonly used in environmental impact assessment studies. Estimates of ET from METRIC indicate a net decrease in ET in the first year after thinning for all of the thinned plots but show significant variability (~2 – 12 %) between areas with different terrain characteristics. The impact of surface parameters such as slope, aspect, or albedo among others are currently being examined using multivariate statistical analysis methods to improve the understanding of the spatial and temporal variability of ET for regional forest vegetation groups. Future insights based on such estimates could help in identifying areas that have the largest response to land management practices such as tree thinning.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86457", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86458" } }
{"authors":"Jeffrey Heenan::Rutgers University Newark--Dimitrios Ntarlagiannis::Rutgers University--Lee Slater::Rutgers Univ--Estella Atekwana::Oklahoma State University Main Campus--Silvia Rossbach::Western Michigan University--Carol Beaver::Western Michigan University--Andre Revil::Colorado School of Mines--Barbara Bekins::USGS Western Regional Offices Menlo Park--", "title":"H41J-08: Self Potential as an indicator of biogeochemical transformations during active hydrocarbon biodegradation processes", "abstract":"Self potential (SP) signals, collected from borehole installation at the National Crude Oil Spill Fate and Natural Attenuation Research Site at Bemidji (MN), show a strong bipolar anomaly centered around the smear zone where intense bioremediation is known to occur. Magnetic susceptibility (MS) and geochemical analysis of soil cores confirmed the presence of a magnetite layer at the smear zone. The observed anomaly is consistent with the operation of a bio-geobattery centered on the conductive magnetite. This bio-geobattery is not permanent, but instead periodically shuts down, while at other times it reaches a maximum potential difference of ~ 70mV. The transient operation of the bio-geobattery appears to be associated with changes in the gradient of the redox species in the vicinity of the magnetite layer. Microbiological analysis of the soil cores identified microbial species that can support the operation of a bio-geobattery with the anode located below the magnetite, and the cathode above the magnetite layer. Environmental conditions local to the smear zone (e.g. water table change, rain water infiltration) seem to change the microbial dynamics around the magnetite layer resulting in redox gradient changes, essentially turning 'on' and 'off' the bio-geobattery. This work provides strong field-scale evidence for the functioning of a biogeobattery resulting from long-term biodegradation of a crude oil spill.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86458", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86459" } }
{"authors":"Kolby Jardine::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--", "title":"B51D-0451: Volatile isoprenoids as defense compounds during abiotic stress in tropical plants", "abstract":"Emissions of volatile isoprenoids from tropical forests play central roles in atmospheric processes by fueling atmospheric chemistry resulting in modified aerosol and cloud lifecycles and their associated feedbacks with the terrestrial biosphere. However, the identities of tropical isoprenoids, their biological and environmental controls, and functions within plants and ecosystems remain highly uncertain. As part of the DOE ARM program’s GoAmazon 2014/15 campaign, extensive field and laboratory observations of volatile isoprenoids are being conducted in the central Amazon. Here we report the results of our completed and ongoing activities at the ZF2 forest reserve in the central Amazon. Among the results of the research are the suprisingly high abundance of light-dependent volatile isoprenoid emissions across abundant tree genera in the Amazon in both primary and secondary forests, the discovery of highly reactive monoterpene emissions from Amazon trees, and evidence for the importance of volatile isoprenoids in protecting photosynthesis during oxidative stress under elevated temperatures including energy consumption and direct antioxidant functions and a tight connection betwen volatile isoprenoid emissions, photorespiration, and CO2 recycling within leaves. The results highlight the need to model allocation of carbon to isoprenoids during elevated temperature stress in the tropics.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86459", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86460" } }
{"authors":"Henglei Zhang::China unversity of Geosciences--Dhananjay Ravat::University of Kentucky--", "title":"V11A-3058: The model of lithospheric thickness beneath China from gravity data", "abstract":"We compare estimates of lithospheric thickness from several studies in China and examine whether the available gravity field anomalies can constrain these estimates. Ma (1987) suggested based on integrated geophysics that the lithospheric thickness varies from ~130 km in Qinling Dabie orogenic belt to ~60 km in Beijing, and ~50 km in Bohai bay. Lebedev and Nolet (2003) determined the lithospheric thickness in Bohai bay to be ~140 km from S wave tomography. Sodoudi et al.’s (2006) estimate of the lithospheric thickness is 72 km in Qinling Dabie orogenic belt and ~60 km in north China block. Since physical character differences exist between lithosphere and asthenosphere, it is possible to determine the thickness of lithospheric though gravity data. In this study, we use the crustal thickness obtained from teleseismic receiver functions (Li et al., 2014) to model the Moho gravity field variation and then remove this variation from the observed gravity field. Based on the residual field, the lithospheric thickness is obtained by the Parker inversion. Results show that the lithospheric thickness beneath China varies from ~80 km in the north of XinJiang to ~140 km in Tibet, and it changes to ~100 km in Eastern China. The residual field used for inversion is smooth which results in a smooth lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary (LAB). The LAB is generally in agreement with the previous seismic inversion result along profiles in eastern China (e.g. Li et al., 2011) and suggests that our method could be used to estimate the regional lithospheric variation in other areas in China, and somewhere else.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86460", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86462" } }
{"authors":"Shane Murphy::University of Wyoming--Rudra Pokhrel::University of Wyoming--Eric Beamesderfer::University of Wyoming--Nicholas Wagner::NOAA ESRL--Justin Langridge::Met Office--Daniel Lack::CIRES--", "title":"A41M-04: Methods to Parameterize Brown Carbon, Distinguish Brown Carbon Absorption From Enhanced Black Carbon Absorption, and Assess the Stability of Brown Carbon to Photochemical Aging", "abstract":"We present results obtained during the Fire Lab at Missoula Experiment-4 (FLAME-4) with a combination of multi-wavelength photoacoustic and cavity ringdown spectrometers. It will be shown that the single scattering albedo and Angstrom exponent of biomass burning emissions can be better parameterized by the organic carbon to black carbon ratio than by the modified combustion efficiency. Two different methods to distinguish the contribution to aerosol absorption from brown carbon versus black carbon and enhanced black carbon absorption will be presented. One method is based on extending the absorption seen at 660 nm with an assumed Angstrom exponent while the other assumes a similar absorption enhancement (determined via thermal denuder) of black carbon at 660 and 405 nm. Potential errors and advantages of both methods will be discussed. Finally, chamber experiments that show degradation of brown carbon by photochemical oxidation will be presented along with a number of methods by which to assess the amount of brown carbon that is degraded.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86462", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86463" } }
{"authors":"Chris Grose::Macquarie University--Juan Afonso::Macquarie University--", "title":"DI31A-2549: REE chemistry of MORB and OIB explained by microchemical disequilibrium melting models", "abstract":"We have developed a two-dimensional numerical model of multi-phase coarsening, diffusive trace element partitioning, and near-fractional melting. The model is applied to decompression melting of MORB and OIB sources and the prediction of REE (La, Sm, and Yb) in erupted lavas. We show that the major features in global OIB REE systematics are easily explained via the so-called LID effect. The properties of models which do explain the data indicate that the OIB source cannot be hot (>1400°C) and may be compositionally similar to the MORB source. Moreover, our models predict that the thermo-mechanical LAB temperature is about 1225°C, average grain radii in the OIB source is on the order of 2-5 mm, and the bulk source compositions of REE are about 2-7 times higher than previous estimates.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86463", "section":"Earth's Deep Interior"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86464" } }
{"authors":"Matthew Malkowski::Stanford University--Zane Jobe::Shell Exploration and Production Company--Glenn Sharman::ConocoPhillips Company Houston--Stephan Graham::Stanford University--", "title":"EP41B-0927: Facies Variations Along an Ancient Deep-Water Axial Channel Belt: Insights from the Upper Cretaceous Cerro Toro Formation, Magallanes–Austral Basin, Patagonia", "abstract":"The Upper Cretaceous Cerro Toro Formation preserves a >150 kilometer long deep-water axial channel belt in the Magallanes–Austral Basin in southern Patagonia. Considerable work over the past decade in the Chilean basin sector reveals a 3.5–8 km wide channel-levee system that transported coarse-grained sediment from north to south via a range of low- to high-density turbidity currents, debris flows, and transitional/hybrid flows. In contrast, the more proximal deposits preserved in the Argentine basin sector to the north received little focus. This study documents new sedimentology, stratigraphy, and U-Pb geochronology from the Cerro Toro Formation in Argentina, allowing for a basin-scale comparison of the timing of deposition, sediment sources, and facies and grain size variability. Two ash beds from the base of the section yield U-Pb zircon ages of 90.4 ± 2 Ma and 88.0 ± 3 Ma, suggesting similar, if not slightly older, ages for the lower Cerro Toro Formation when compared to equivalent units to the south. U-Pb detrital zircon age spectra reveal similar provenance trends along the entire outcrop belt, with peak age populations at 310–260, 160–135, and 110–82 Ma. Preliminary statistical analyses of more than 5700 meters of new and previously published detailed stratigraphic sections suggest that, in general, characteristics such as mean bed thickness and net to gross remain fairly consistent along the outcrop belt. However, the bed thickness distributions are log-normal, and the northern sector has higher maximum bed thickness than the southern sector. There are also gradual variations in the down-system (north to south) proportion of lithofacies. For instance, in the northern (Argentine) sector, lithofacies representing mass wasting processes (e.g., debris flow conglomerates and mass-transport deposits) account for as much as ~80 percent of the stratigraphic thickness, whereas near the southern end of the channel belt, coarse-grained facies are almost entirely the result of low- and high-density turbidity currents. Thus while longitudinal variations in overall grain size and average bed thickness are somewhat subtle, the proportion of thick beds and distribution of lithofacies represent important down-system changes in this sediment routing system.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86464", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86465" } }
{"authors":"Daniel Miller::University of Maryland Baltimore County--Zhibo Zhang::University of Maryland Baltimore County--Céline Cornet::Laboratoire d'Optique Atmosphérique (Lille)--Andrew Ackerman::NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies--Steven Platnick::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--", "title":"A11A-0009: An Exploration of 3-D Radiative Effects on Polarimetric Cloud Microphysical Retrievals: Results from idealized case studies and an LES satellite simulator", "abstract":"Case studies of 3-D polarized radiative effects and their influence on cloud microphysical retrievals are presented from two perspectives: The first focuses on idealized cloud cases, isolating simplified examples of the impact of horizontal photon transfer. The second examines clouds under more realistic inhomogeneous conditions by analyzing 3-D effects observed in a bounded-cascade fractal cloud model as well as an LES cloud model. Within this study, we generate radiances using the 3-D polarized Monte Carlo code 3DMCPOL [Cornet et al., 2010] and the NASA GISS 1-D Polarized Doubling-Adding (PDA) code [de Haan et al., 1987]. Comparisons between the 1-D and 3-D radiances and retrievals will be made in order to study various impacts and retrieval biases. Specifically, we directly examine 3-D effects influencing radiance (i.e. shadowing/illuminating effects, photon transport out of cloud edge), as well as the impact of optical and microphysical inhomogeneity on 3-D polarimetric retrievals. One area we will address specifically is how 3-D radiative effects impact polarimetric retrievals near cloud edges. Additionally, we examine the practical implications of retrieval resolution and cloud top height. The relevance of these results for the analysis of data from future satellite polarimetric cloud remote sensing missions, such as NASA’s PACE mission, or ESA’s 3MI mission, will be discussed briefly.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86465", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86466" } }
{"authors":"Kristen Whitney::Chapman University--Hesham El-Askary::Chapman University--", "title":"NH43A-1870: Utilizing Remote Sensing Landsat 7 Data to Measure Changes in Soil Salinity in Central Valley, CA", "abstract":"Drought in California has had a major impact on agriculture in the Central Valley. A decrease in irrigation and soil moisture creates an increase in soil salinity. The are focused on south of Fresno and north of Bakersfield which is path 42 and row 35. Remote sensing data provided by Landsat 7 ETM+ remote sensing data provides 7 bands of reflection in a 30 meter by 30 meter resolution. Bands reflecting red, near infrared and short-wave infrared are used to produce indices concerning vegetation and soil salinity over 12 years. The normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) require the red and near infrared. Two soil salinity indices (SI) are calculate one requires red, infrared and short-wave infrared bands, and the other requires green, violet and red bands. Three dates within the 12 years are studied to show changes in the NDVI and SI.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86466", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86467" } }
{"authors":"Christopher Tasich::Vanderbilt University--Leslie Duncan::Vanderbilt University--Benjamin Duncan::Murray State--Bethany Burkhardt::Vanderbilt University--Laura Benneyworth::Vanderbilt University--", "title":"ED31B-0904: Getting the Most Out of Dual-Listed Courses: Involving Undergraduate Students in Discussion Through Active Learning Techniques", "abstract":"Dual-listed courses will persist in higher education because of resource limitations. The pedagogical differences between undergraduate and graduate STEM student groups and the underlying distinction in intellectual development levels between the two student groups complicate the inclusion of undergraduates in these courses. Active learning techniques are a possible remedy to the hardships undergraduate students experience in graduate-level courses. Through an analysis of both undergraduate and graduate student experiences while enrolled in a dual-listed course, we implemented a variety of learning techniques used to complement the learning of both student groups and enhance deep discussion. Here, we provide details concerning the implementation of four active learning techniques – role play, game, debate, and small group – that were used to help undergraduate students critically discuss primary literature. Student perceptions were gauged through an anonymous, end-of-course evaluation that contained basic questions comparing the course to other courses at the university and other salient aspects of the course. These were given as a Likert scale on which students rated a variety of statements (1 = strongly disagree, 3 = no opinion, and 5 = strongly agree). Undergraduates found active learning techniques to be preferable to traditional techniques with small-group discussions being rated the highest in both enjoyment and enhanced learning. The graduate student discussion leaders also found active learning techniques to improve discussion. In hindsight, students of all cultures may be better able to take advantage of such approaches and to critically read and discuss primary literature when written assignments are used to guide their reading. Applications of active learning techniques can not only address the gap between differing levels of students, but also serve as a complement to student engagement in any science course design.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86467", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86468" } }
{"authors":"Joan Blanco::University of Houston--Paul Mann::University of Houston--", "title":"T11E-2951: STRUCTURE OF THE LA VELA OFFSHORE BASIN, WESTERN VENEZUELA: AN OBLIQUELY-OPENING RIFT BASIN WITHIN THE SOUTH AMERICA-CARIBBEAN, STRIKE-SLIP PLATE BOUNDARY", "abstract":"Bathymetric, gravity and magnetic maps show that the east-west trend of the Cretaceous Great Arc of the Caribbean in the Leeward Antilles islands is transected by an en echelon series of obliquely-sheared rift basins that show right-lateral offsets ranging from 20 to 40 km. The basins are 75-100 km in length and 20-30 km in width and are composed of sub-parallel, oblique slip normal faults that define deep, bathymetric channels that bound the larger islands of the Leeward Antilles including Aruba, Curacao and Bonaire. A single basin of similar orientation and structure, the Urumaco basin, is present to the southwest in the Gulf of Venezuela. We mapped structures and sedimentation in the La Vela rift basin using a 3D seismic data volume recorded down to 6 seconds TWT. The basin can be mapped from the Falcon coast where it is correlative with the right-lateral Adicora fault mapped onshore, and its submarine extension. To the southeast of the 3D survey area, previous workers have mapped a 70-km-wide zone of northeast-striking, oblique, right-lateral faults, some with apparent right-lateral offsets of the coastline. On seismic data, the faults vary in dip from 45 to 60 degrees and exhibit maximum vertical offsets of 600 m. The La Vela and other obliquely-opening rifts accommodate right-lateral shear with linkages to intervening, east-west-striking right-lateral faults like the Adicora. The zone of oblique rifts is restricted to the trend of the Great Arc of the Caribbean and may reflect the susceptiblity of this granitic basement to active shearing. The age of onset for the basins known from previous studies on the Leeward Antilles is early Miocene. As most of these faults occur offshore their potential to generate damaging earthquakes in the densely populated Leeward Antilles is not known.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86468", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86469" } }
{"authors":"Zifeng Wang::Beijing Normal University--", "title":"H41B-1294: Generalized Likelihood Uncertainty Estimation (GLUE) Using Multi-Optimization Algorithm as Sampling Method", "abstract":"For decades, distributed and lumped hydrological models have furthered our understanding of hydrological system. The development of hydrological simulation in large scale and high precision elaborated the spatial descriptions and hydrological behaviors. Meanwhile, the new trend is also followed by the increment of model complexity and number of parameters, which brings new challenges of uncertainty quantification. Generalized Likelihood Uncertainty Estimation (GLUE) has been widely used in uncertainty analysis for hydrological models referring to Monte Carlo method coupled with Bayesian estimation. However, the stochastic sampling method of prior parameters adopted by GLUE appears inefficient, especially in high dimensional parameter space. The heuristic optimization algorithms utilizing iterative evolution show better convergence speed and optimality-searching performance. In light of the features of heuristic optimization algorithms, this study adopted genetic algorithm, differential evolution, shuffled complex evolving algorithm to search the parameter space and obtain the parameter sets of large likelihoods. Based on the multi-algorithm sampling, hydrological model uncertainty analysis is conducted by the typical GLUE framework. To demonstrate the superiority of the new method, two hydrological models of different complexity are examined. The results shows the adaptive method tends to be efficient in sampling and effective in uncertainty analysis, providing an alternative path for uncertainty quantilization.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86469", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86470" } }
{"authors":"Tyler Davis::Imperial College London Robert W. Holley Center for Agriculture and Health--David Schneider::Robert W. Holley Center for Agriculture and Health--Hoi Cheng::Robert W. Holley Center for Agriculture and Health--Nathanael Shaw::Robert W. Holley Center for Agriculture and Health--Leon Kochian::Robert W. Holley Center for Agriculture and Health--Jon Shaff::Robert W. Holley Center for Agriculture and Health--", "title":"H43G-1613: Toward a Low-Cost System for High-Throughput Image-Based Phenotyping of Root System Architecture", "abstract":"Root system architecture is being studied more closely for improved nutrient acquisition, stress tolerance and carbon sequestration by relating the genetic material that corresponds to preferential physical features. This information can help direct plant breeders in addressing the growing concerns regarding the global demand on crops and fossil fuels. To help support this incentive comes a need to make high-throughput image-based phenotyping of plant roots, at the individual plant scale, simpler and more affordable. Our goal is to create an affordable and portable product for simple image collection, processing and management that will extend root phenotyping to institutions with limited funding (e.g., in developing countries). Thus, a new integrated system has been developed using the Raspberry Pi single-board computer. Similar to other 3D-based imaging platforms, the system utilizes a stationary camera to photograph a rotating crop root system (e.g., rice, maize or sorghum) that is suspended either in a gel or on a mesh (for hydroponics). In contrast, the new design takes advantage of powerful open-source hardware and software to reduce the system costs, simplify the imaging process, and manage the large datasets produced by the high-resolution photographs. A newly designed graphical user interface (GUI) unifies the system controls (e.g., adjusting camera and motor settings and orchestrating the motor motion with image capture), making it easier to accommodate a variety of experiments. During each imaging session, integral metadata necessary for reproducing experiment results are collected (e.g., plant type and age, growing conditions and treatments, camera settings) using hierarchical data format files. These metadata are searchable within the GUI and can be selected and extracted for further analysis. The GUI also supports an image previewer that performs limited image processing (e.g., thresholding and cropping). Root skeletonization, 3D reconstruction and trait calculation (e.g., rooting depth, rooting angle, total volume of roots) is being developed in conjunction with this project.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86470", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86471" } }
{"authors":"James Bela::Oregon Earthquake Awareness / ISSO--", "title":"NH13D-1953: Errors in Seismic Hazard Assessment are Creating Huge Human Losses", "abstract":"The current practice of representing earthquake hazards to the public based upon their perceived likelihood or probability of occurrence is proven now by the global record of actual earthquakes to be not only erroneous and unreliable, but also too deadly! Earthquake occurrence is sporadic and therefore assumptions of earthquake frequency and return-period are both not only misleading, but also categorically false. More than 700,000 people have now lost their lives (2000-2011), wherein 11 of the World's Deadliest Earthquakes have occurred in locations where probability-based seismic hazard assessments had predicted only low seismic low hazard. Unless seismic hazard assessment and the setting of minimum earthquake design safety standards for buildings and bridges are based on a more realistic deterministic recognition of ` what can happen`  rather than on what mathematical models suggest is ` most likely to happen`  such future huge human losses can only be expected to continue! The actual earthquake events that did occur were at or near the maximum potential-size event that either already had occurred in the past; or were geologically known to be possible. Haiti's M7 earthquake, 2010 (with > 222,000 fatalities) meant the dead could not even be buried with dignity. Japan's catastrophic Tohoku earthquake, 2011; a M9 Megathrust earthquake, unleashed a tsunami that not only obliterated coastal communities along the northern Japanese coast, but also claimed > 20,000 lives. This tsunami flooded nuclear reactors at Fukushima, causing 4 explosions and 3 reactors to melt down. But while this history of huge human losses due to erroneous and misleading seismic hazard estimates, despite its wrenching pain, cannot be unlived; if faced with courage and a more realistic deterministic estimate of ` what is possible` , it need not be lived again. An objective testing of the results of global probability based seismic hazard maps against real occurrences has never been done by the GSHAP team; even though the obvious inadequacy of the GSHAP map could have been established in the course of a simple check before the project completion. The doctrine of ` psha exceptionalism`  that created the maps can only be esponged by carefully examining the facts . . . which unfortunately include huge human losses!", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86471", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86472" } }
{"authors":"Zhenhua Zou::University of Oklahoma Norman Campus--Xiangming Xiao::University of Oklahoma Norman Campus--", "title":"B43C-0577: Assessment of Vegetation Destruction Due to Wenchuan Earthquake and Its Recovery Process Using MODIS Data", "abstract":"With a high temporal resolution and a large covering area, MODIS data are particularly useful in assessing vegetation destruction and recovery of a wide range of areas. In this study, MOD13Q1 data of the growing season (Mar. to Nov.) are used to calculate the Maximum NDVI (NDVImax) of each year. This study calculates each pixel’s mean and standard deviation of the NDVImaxs in the 8 years before the earthquake. If the pixel’s NDVImax of 2008 is two standard deviation smaller than the mean NDVImax, this pixel is detected as a vegetation destructed pixel. For each vegetation destructed pixel, its similar pixels of the same vegetation type are selected within the latitude difference of 0.5 degrees, altitude difference of 100 meters and slope difference of 3 degrees. Then the NDVImax difference of each vegetation destructed pixel and its similar pixels are calculated. The 5 similar pixels with the smallest NDVImax difference in the 8 years before the earthquake are selected as reference pixels. The mean NDVImaxs of these reference pixels after the earthquake are calculated and serve as the criterion to assess the vegetation recovery process.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86472", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86473" } }
{"authors":"Yiduo Liu::University of Houston--Michael Murphy::University of Houston--Ross Andrea::University of Houston--", "title":"T51E-2964: Slip re-orientation in the oblique Abiquiu embayment, northern Rio Grande rift", "abstract":"Traditional models of oblique rifting predict that an oblique fault accommodates both dip-slip and strike-slip kinematics. However, recent analog experiments suggest that slip can be re-oriented to almost pure dip-slip on oblique faults if a preexisting weak zone is present at the onset of oblique extension. In this study, we use fault slip data from the Abiquiu embayment in northern Rio Grande rift to test the new model. The Rio Grande rift is a Cenozoic oblique rift extending from southern Colorado to New Mexico. From north to south, it comprises three major half grabens (San Luis, Española, and Albuquerque). The Abiquiu embayment is a sub-basin of the San Luis basin in northern New Mexico. Rift-border faults are generally older and oblique to the trend of the rift, whereas internal faults are younger and approximately N-S striking, i.e. orthogonal to the regional extension direction. Rift-border faults are deep-seated in the basement rocks while the internal faults only cut shallow stratigraphic sections. It has been suggested by many that inherited structures may influence the Rio Grande rifting. Particularly, Laramide structures (and possibly the Ancestral Rockies as well) that bound the Abiquiu embayment strike N- to NW. Our data show that internal faults in the Abiquiu embayment exhibit almost pure dip-slip (rake of slickenlines = 90º ± 15º), independent of their orientations with respect to the regional extension direction. On the contrary, border faults show two sets of rakes: almost pure dip-slip (rake = 90º ± 15º) where the fault is sub-parallel to the foliation, and moderately-oblique (rake = 30º ± 15º) where the fault is high angle to the foliation. We conclude that slip re-orientation occurs on most internal faults and some oblique border faults under the influence of inherited structures. Regarding those border faults on which slip is not re-oriented, we hypothesize that it may be caused by the Jemez volcanism or small-scale mantle convection.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86473", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86474" } }
{"authors":"Andrew Wood::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Elizabeth Clark::University of California Los Angeles--Andrew Newman::University Corporation for Atmospheric Research--Bart Nijssen::University of Washington Seattle Campus--Martyn Clark::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Subhrendu Gangopadhyay::Bureau of Reclamation Denver--J Arnold::US Army Corps of Engineers--", "title":"H53A-1654: Real-time demonstration and evaluation of over-the-loop short to medium-range ensemble streamflow forecasting", "abstract":"The US National Weather Service River Forecasting Centers are beginning to operationalize short range to medium range ensemble predictions that have been in development for several years. This practice contrasts with the traditional single-value forecast practice at these lead times not only because the ensemble forecasts offer a basis for quantifying forecast uncertainty, but also because the use of ensembles requires a greater degree of automation in the forecast workflow than is currently used. For instance, individual ensemble member forcings cannot (practically) be manually adjusted, a step not uncommon with the current single-value paradigm, thus the forecaster is required to adopt a more 'over-the-loop' role than before. The relative lack of experience among operational forecasters and forecast users (eg, water managers) in the US with over-the-loop approaches motivates the creation of a real-time demonstration and evaluation platform for exploring the potential of over-the-loop workflows to produce usable ensemble short-to-medium range forecasts, as well as long range predictions. We describe the development and early results of such an effort by a collaboration between NCAR and the two water agencies, the US Army Corps of Engineers and the US Bureau of Reclamation. Focusing on small to medium sized headwater basins around the US, and using multi-decade series of ensemble streamflow hindcasts, we also describe early results, assessing the skill of daily-updating, over-the-loop forecasts driven by a set of ensemble atmospheric outputs from the NCEP GEFS for lead times from 1-15 days.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86474", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86476" } }
{"authors":"Amanda Cuellar::University of Texas at Austin--Daene McKinney::University of Texas at Austin--", "title":"PA11B-2158: Decision Making Methodology to Mitigate Damage From Glacial Lake Outburst Floods From Imja Lake in Nepal", "abstract":"Climate change has accelerated glacial retreat in high altitude glaciated regions of Nepal leading to the growth and formation of glacier lakes. Glacial lake outburst floods (GLOF) are sudden events triggered by an earthquake, moraine failure or other shock that causes a sudden outflow of water. These floods are catastrophic because of their sudden onset, the difficulty predicting them, and enormous quantity of water and debris rapidly flooding downstream areas. Imja Lake in the Himalaya of Nepal has experienced accelerated growth since it first appeared in the 1960s. Communities threatened by a flood from Imja Lake have advocated for projects to adapt to the increasing threat of a GLOF. Nonetheless, discussions surrounding projects for Imja have not included a rigorous analysis of the potential consequences of a flood, probability of an event, or costs of mitigation projects in part because this information is unknown or uncertain. This work presents a demonstration of a decision making methodology developed to rationally analyze the risks posed by Imja Lake and the various adaptation projects proposed using available information. In this work the authors use decision analysis, data envelopement analysis (DEA), and sensitivity analysis to assess proposed adaptation measures that would mitigate damage in downstream communities from a GLOF. We use an existing hydrodynamic model of the at-risk area to determine how adaptation projects will affect downstream flooding and estimate fatalities using an empirical method developed for dam failures. The DEA methodology allows us to estimate the value of a statistical life implied by each project given the cost of the project and number of lives saved to determine which project is the most efficient. In contrast the decision analysis methodology requires fatalities to be assigned a cost but allows the inclusion of uncertainty in the decision making process. We compare the output of these two methodologies and determine the sensitivity of the conclusions to changes in uncertain input parameters including project cost, value of a statistical life, and time to a GLOF event.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86476", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86477" } }
{"authors":"Amarnath Gupta::University of California San Diego--", "title":"IN41C-1715: GeoSciGraph: An Ontological Framework for EarthCube Semantic Infrastructure", "abstract":"The CINERGI (Community Inventory of EarthCube Resources for Geosciences Interoperability) project compiles an inventory of a wide variety of earth science resources including documents, catalogs, vocabularies, data models, data services, process models, information repositories, domain-specific ontologies etc. developed by research groups and data practitioners. We have developed a multidisciplinary semantic framework called GeoSciGraph semantic ingration of earth science resources. An integrated ontology is constructed with Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) as its upper ontology and currently ingests multiple component ontologies including the SWEET ontology, GeoSciML's lithology ontology, Tematres controlled vocabulary server, GeoNames, GCMD vocabularies on equipment, platforms and institutions, software ontology, CUAHSI hydrology vocabulary, the environmental ontology (ENVO) and several more. These ontologies are connected through bridging axioms; GeoSciGraph identifies lexically close terms and creates equivalence class or subclass relationships between them after human verification. GeoSciGraph allows a community to create community-specific customizations of the integrated ontology. GeoSciGraph uses the Neo4J,a graph database that can hold several billion concepts and relationships. GeoSciGraph provides a number of REST services that can be called by other software modules like the CINERGI information augmentation pipeline. 1) Vocabulary services are used to find exact and approximate terms, term categories (community-provided clusters of terms e.g., measurement-related terms or environmental material related terms), synonyms, term definitions and annotations. 2) Lexical services are used for text parsing to find entities, which can then be included into the ontology by a domain expert. 3) Graph services provide the ability to perform traversal centric operations e.g., finding paths and neighborhoods which can be used to perform ontological operations like computing transitive closure (e.g., finding all subclasses of rocks). 4) Annotation services are used to adorn an arbitrary block of text (e.g., from a NOAA catalog record) with ontology terms. The system has been used to ontologically integrate diverse sources like Science-base, NOAA records, PETDB.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86477", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86479" } }
{"authors":"Chae Woo Jun::Solar-Terrestrial Environment Laboratory--Kazuo Shiokawa::Nagoya University--Kazue Takahashi::Applied Physics Laboratory Johns Hopkins--Kristoff Paulson::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Ian Schofield::Athabasca University--Martin Connors::Athabasca University--Igor Poddelskiy::Far Eastern Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences--B. Shevtsov::Far Eastern Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences--Craig Kletzing::University of Iowa--John Wygant::University of Minnesota Twin Cities--", "title":"SM41H-2576: Statistical study of propagation characteristics of Pc1 pearl structures using conjugate ground-satellite observations", "abstract":"We investigated statistical characteristics of pearl structures (amplitude modulation) of Pc1 pulsations using conjugate observations with the ground induction magnetometers located at Athabasca (ATH, L = 4.3) in Canada and Magadan (MGD, L = 2.7) in Russia and the Van Allen Probes (RBSP-A and B) satellites located in the inner magnetosphere for a 1-year period (August 2012 to August 2013). We consider a ground magnetometer and a satellite to be conjugate when the satellite footprint is located within 1000 km of the ground magnetometer. From a survey of data acquired during the conjunction periods, we found 42 pearl Pc1events. These events were classified into four categories: structured Pc1 waves observed at both locations (9 events), structured Pc1 waves observed only on the ground (22 events) or in space (0 events), and unstructured Pc1 waves at both locations (11 events). We describe the spatial and temporal distributions of Pc1 pearl structures and their dependence on geomagnetic conditions. We also compare the frequency, the power ratio between space and ground, and the polarization among the four categories of events. In addition, we verified the similarity of Pc1 pearl structures between ground and space observations in order to investigate propagation and polarization characteristics of Pc1 pearl structures from the magnetosphere to the ionosphere.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86479", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86480" } }
{"authors":"Sierra Young::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Joshua Peschel::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--", "title":"IN33C-1814: Waterway-View Imaging with a Small Unmanned Surface System", "abstract":"This research investigated the use of a small unmanned surface system (USS) for waterway-view imaging in an intensively managed agricultural landscape. Tile drains commonly dewater landscapes into drainage tributaries so that land uses such as agricultural production can occur. The outlets of tile drain networks, which contribute to the water balance in a river network, are often located on private property and in most instances cannot be readily cataloged. Remote sensing presents one option for identifying tile drain networks but vegetation and other topographic occlusions may obstruct identification. This work presents a case study in the Upper Sangamon River Basin in East-Central Illinois for the use of a small USS utilizing visual sensing with a 360-degree camera as an alternative method of mapping agricultural tile drain outlets for improved hydrologic and hydraulic modeling. The results are expected to serve as groundwork for future design and refinement of small unmanned surface vehicles, as well as improved human interfaces for USS, and a foundation for better understanding human-machine interaction in USS applied to agricultural, riparian, and similar domains.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86480", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86481" } }
{"authors":"Paul Hazendonk::University of Lethbridge--", "title":"GC31F-05: Algal Energy Conversion and Capture", "abstract":"We address the potential for energy conversions and capture for: energy generation; reduction in energy use; reduction in greenhouse gas emissions; remediation of water and air pollution; protection and enhancement of soil fertility. These processes have the potential to sequester carbon at scales that may have global impact. Energy conversion and capture strategies evaluate energy use and production from agriculture, urban areas and industries, and apply existing and emerging technologies to reduce and recapture energy embedded in waste products. The basis of biocrude production from Micro-algal feedstocks: 1) The nutrients from the liquid fraction of waste streams are concentrated and fed into photo bioreactors (essentially large vessels in which microalgae are grown) along with CO2 from flue gasses from down stream processes. 2) The algae are processed to remove high value products such as proteins and beta-carotenes. The advantage of algae feedstocks is the high biomass productivity is 30-50 times that of land based crops and the remaining biomass contains minimal components that are difficult to convert to biocrude. 3) The remaining biomass undergoes hydrothermal liquefaction to produces biocrude and biochar. The flue gasses of this process can be used to produce electricity (fuel cell) and subsequently fed back into the photobioreactor. The thermal energy required for this process is small, hence readily obtained from solar-thermal sources, and furthermore no drying or preprocessing is required keeping the energy overhead extremely small. 4) The biocrude can be upgraded and refined as conventional crude oil, creating a range of liquid fuels. In principle this process can be applied on the farm scale to the municipal scale. Overall, our primary food production is too dependent on fossil fuels. Energy conversion and capture can make food production sustainable.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86481", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86482" } }
{"authors":"Daniel Frost::Arizona State University--Edward Garnero::Arizona State University--", "title":"DI11C-2607: TA sub-array measurements of SmKS ray parameters to determine lower mantle influence", "abstract":"Velocity variations within the Earth can deflect seismic waves from the paths predicted by 1-D velocity models. This manifests as perturbations in the travel-time and incoming wave direction of observed waves. While the presence of velocity heterogeneity in Earth’s mantle has long been known, its affects on waves that travel into Earth’s core are less well documented. The radial velocity structure in the outermost core continues to receive attention, as structure there likely relates to heat and chemical exchange between the core and mantle, as well as core convection and thus the geodynamo. Here we investigate the wave group SmKS, which are SV waves in the mantle that convert to P waves in the core, bouncing on the underside of the core-mantle boundary (CMB) with m legs in the core (for example, S2KS has two path segments in the core with one underside CMB reflection). We specifically investigate the relationship between lowermost mantle velocity heterogeneity and perturbations in SmKS path geometry and travel-times. We use sub-arrays of EarthScope’s Transportable Array (TA) and high-resolution array processing methods to resolve SmKS slowness, back-azimuth, and travel-time information. Regional patterns of both time and incident direction anomalies relative to 1-D reference model predictions are determined, which relate to heterogeneity along the wave path. SmKS travel-times and incident direction anomalies are used in conjunction with information on 3-D heterogeneity from tomography to identify the source of the observed anomalies. By identifying the lower mantle contribution to the times and paths of SmKS waves, the efficacy and robustness of SmKS waves to resolve fine-scale outermost core structure can be better established.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86482", "section":"Earth's Deep Interior"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86483" } }
{"authors":"Anne Fulton::Pomona College--Pavel Izbekov::Alaska Volcano Observatory Fairbanks--Kirsten Nicolaysen::Whitman College--", "title":"V13B-3109: Insights into Magma Evolution in the Islands of the Four Mountains, Alaska", "abstract":"The Islands of the Four Mountains (IFM) is a group of small volcanoes in the central region of Alaska’s Aleutian island arc. There are few studies of this remote group of islands despite their rich archeological history and diverse eruptive histories. This study focuses on silicic deposits from the IFM to shed light on the area’s history of large explosive eruptions and the IFM’s chemical relationship to the rest of the central Aleutian Islands. This study applies whole rock geochemistry, detailed petrographic analysis, and electron microprobe analysis to samples of volcanic deposits from Tana, Cleveland, Carlisle, and Herbert volcanoes, including the first documented ignimbrite deposit in the IFM, found on northern Tana. The IFM lavas range from basaltic to dacitic and follow typical island arc and calc-alkaline chemical trends, providing evidence of high aqueous fluid input to the mantle wedge, as well as varying levels of influence from subducted sediments. Tana, the largest (~12 km2) and most siliceous of the IFM volcanoes, expresses anomalies in K and Rb concentrations that may aid in the refinement of the continental-oceanic crust boundary location along the Aleutian arc. Plagioclase phenocryst disequilibrium textures and compositions provide evidence of mixing and recharge in the IFM magma chambers. Multiple plagioclase phenocryst populations, euhedral pyroxene crystals in disequilibrium with the melt, and angular xenolithic clasts in the Tana ignimbrite suggest a rapid mixing and heating event that triggered its large explosive eruption during the Pleistocene.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86483", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86484" } }
{"authors":"Emma Gleeman::Brown University--Steven Clemens::Brown University--Allison Lawman::Brown University--Yoshimi Kubota::National Museum of Nature and Science--Ann Holbourn::University of Kiel--April Martin::Brown University--", "title":"PP23A-2274: East China Sea δ18O Record Detects Millennial-Scale Changes in the East Asian Summer Monsoon", "abstract":"The East Asian Summer Monsoon (EASM) brings heavy summer rainfall to some of Asia’s most densely-populated areas, impacting agricultural production and water resources. Sediment cores were recovered from International Ocean Drilling Program Site U1429 in the East China Sea (31° 37.04’ N, 128° 59.50’ E, 732 mbsl). This location receives runoff from the Yangtze River, which serves as a major drainage system for monsoon-induced precipitation. Hence, the δ18O record of planktonic foraminifera at Site U1429 reflects changes in regional, monsoon-driven salinity. The top 100 meters of core at Site U1429 were sampled at a preliminary resolution of 15 cm and processed to isolate the planktonic foraminifer Globigerinoides ruber for δ18O mass spectrometry analyses. Abrupt, millennial-scale regional climate variability in the EASM and its linkage to orbital forcings have been reconstructed using stratigraphic analysis of δ18O. The sub-orbital scale structure of the δ18O record over the past 400 kyr matches the structures of both the composite speleothem δ18O from eastern China (Sanbao and Hulu caves) and the planktonic δ18O record from northern South China Sea Site 1146. The similarities between these δ18O records indicate a strong regional response to monsoon forcing. Removal of the temperature component of the δ18O signal by using Mg/Ca (G. ruber) paleothermometry will provide a record of changes in the δ18O composition of seawater in response to Yangtze River runoff.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86484", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86485" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"NH41C-1850: Modeling slope failure by the 3D discrete element method: A case study of the dip slope at the Huafan University campus in northern Taiwan", "abstract":"Slope failure is a widely observed phenomenon in hill and mountainous areas in Taiwan, which is characterized by high erosion rates (up to 60 mm/yr) due to its climatic and geographical conditions. Slope failure events easily occur after intense rainfall, especially resulting from typhoons and accordingly cause a great loss of human lives and property. At the northern end of the Western Foothill belt in northern Taiwan, Huafan University campus (121.692448˚ E, 24.980724˚ N ) is founded on a dip slope, ~20˚ toward southwest, being composed of early Miocene alternations of sandstone and shale. Data from continuous monitoring over the years by means of inclinometers and groundwater gauges reveal that creep of 6–10 mm of the slope occurred when precipitation exceeded 300 mm during typhoons’ striking. In addition, extension cracks on the ground are also found within and on the edge of the campus. Furthermore, potential slip surfaces are detected shown by rock cores to exist 10 and 30 m in depth as well. To understand the kinematic behaviors of the rock slope failure beneath the university campus, a 3D discrete element mothed is applied in this study. Results of the modeling indicate that creeping is the primary behavior pattern when the friction coefficient reduces owing to rise of groundwater during rainstorms. However, rapid slip may take place under influences of earthquake with large magnitude. Suggestions for preventing the slope creep are to construct catchpits to drainage runoff and lower the groundwater table and ground anchors through the slip surfaces to stabilize the slide blocks.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86485", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86486" } }
{"authors":"Antonia Sebastian::Rice University--E.J.C. (Guy) Dupuits::Delft University of Technology--Oswaldo Morales-Napoles::Delft University of Technology--", "title":"NH51C-1894: Assessing Flood Risk from Hurricane-induced Precipitation and Storm Surge: A Bayesian Network Approach", "abstract":"Hurricanes pose a major flood hazard to communities on the U.S. Atlantic and Gulf Coasts. Over the past decade, the economic costs associated with hurricane flood damages have escalated and recent studies indicate that a large percentage of flood damages are occurring outside of FEMA-designated flood hazard areas. While FEMA recently upgraded coastal flood hazard maps using the Advanced CIRCulation (ADCIRC) Model, these maps do not consider the flood hazard resulting from the joint occurrence of precipitation over the watershed and storm surge at the coast. Instead, the two individual hazards are mapped separately, ignoring the floodplain resulting from their interaction. In this study, a risk assessment methodology was developed to predict the damages associated with hurricane-induced flooding in the Houston Galveston Bay Area. Historical hurricanes were analyzed to derive probability distributions for storm surge height, cumulative precipitation, hurricane landfall, wind speed, angle of approach, radius to maximum winds, and forward speed. A Bayesian Network was built and used to simulate a large number of synthetic storms. The resulting 1% combinations of storm surge and precipitation were applied as boundary conditions to a hydraulic modeled and the maximum extent of flooding was compared to the FEMA-designated flood hazard areas. A high resolution GIS-based model was used to predict damages.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86486", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86487" } }
{"authors":"Robert Dahlgren::California State University Monterey Bay--Omar Dary::Bay Area Environmental Research Institute Moffett Field--Joab Ogunbiyi::Morgan State University--Ethan Pinsker::University of California Santa Cruz--Kevin Reynolds::NASA Ames Research Center--Cynthia Werner::USGS Cascades Volcano Observatory--", "title":"NH43C-1909: Upcycling UAS into modular platforms for Earth science and autonomy research", "abstract":"This reports the results of a multidisciplinary project conducted at the NASA Ames Research Center (ARC) involving a number of student interns over the summers of 2014 and 2015. The project had a goal of applying rapid prototyping techniques, including 3D printing, to unmanned aircraft systems (UAS), and demonstrated that surplus UAS could be repurposed into new configurations suitable for conducting science missions. ARC received several units of the RQ-11 Raven and RQ-14 DragonEye manufactured by AeroVironment Corporation, along with ground stations and spare parts. These UAS have electric propulsion, a wingspan and length ~1m; they are designed to disassemble for transport, have a simple wing design with snap-together interfaces, made from lightweight materials. After removing all ITAR restricted technology these were made available to summer interns that also had access to 3D printing, CNC laser-cutting equipment through NASA’s SpaceShop. The modular nature and simple wing profiles enabled the teams to deconstruct and subsequently reconfigure them into completely new airframes. Two multi-fuselage designs were assembled using Ardupilot-based common avionics architecture (CAA), with extended wingspans, an H-tail and an innovative cambered flap system. After NASA internal design reviews, the students fabricated new control surfaces and subcomponents necessary to splice the RQ-14 subcomponents back together. Laboratory testing was performed on test articles to determine bending modulus and safety factors, and documentation was prepared for airworthiness flight safety review. Upon receiving approval of documentation and flight readiness certification, the repurposed UAS were flown at Crows Landing airfield in Stanislaus County, California, initially under RC pilot control and subsequently under fully autonomous control. The RQ-11 is now being used to expand on the modularity design and the Team has been at work in designing different configurations and a payload pod that will allow flexible modular implementation. This project demonstrated that rapid prototyping combined with modular subcomponents can enable an increase in the rate of design iterations on aircraft optimized for science missions. Field data will be reported for missions at the Salton Sea and Crows Landing, California.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86487", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86488" } }
{"authors":"Shakirudeen Lawal::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Joshua Fisher::Jet Propulsion Lab--", "title":"B13F-0700: The Carbon Balance of Semi-Arid Ecosystems: Why Southern Africa Carbon-Climate Dynamics are uniquely different", "abstract":"Previous studies by Poulter et al (2014) and Alhstrom et al (2015) have shown that the semi-arid ecosystems (e.g. Australia) can dramatically alter the regional and global net carbon sink/source status depending on sporadic precipitation. For example, the unprecedented huge carbon sink which occurred in 2011 was mainly due to the growth semi-arid vegetation over Australia; which was driven by increased precipitation. Thus, we sought to uncover if this was the case with the semi-arid ecosystems in southern Africa. We used 10 models from the “Trends In Net Land-Atmosphere Carbon Exchange – Model Inter comparison Project (TRENDY-MIP)” to evaluate response of southern Africa semi-arid ecosystems to precipitation in the 20th century. Our study revealed that the sensitivities and net carbon source/sink dynamics in these ecosystems are distinctly different from those elsewhere owing to opposite climate anomalies; i.e. the region receives sporadic precipitation drops, rather than spikes which is the case in other semi-arid regions. The implications for this study is explored in an ecosystem services context for future trajectories of the region as the ability of the ecosystems to continually provide such services directly depends on the soaring population rise in the region. Key words: Semi-arid ecosystem, Southern Africa, TRENDY-MIP, Carbon dynamics and climate change.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86488", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86490" } }
{"authors":"Pablo Paiewonsky::State University of New York at Albany--", "title":"PP21B-2248: Changing Climate Sensitivity in Response to Forest-Tundra Snow Albedo Feedback during the mid to late Pliocene Cooling", "abstract":"The forest-tundra snow albedo feedback is an important feedback in Earth's climate system, especially due to its potential role in modulating glacial cycles. Until now, little research has been done on how the strength of this feedback might vary with the background climate state. Over the last 4 million years, I hypothesize that the feedback has been generally weaker under warm Northern Hemispheric conditions when tundra has been primarily confined to the high Arctic and forest has extended to most of the Arctic coastline than under cooler Northern Hemispheric conditions in which the forest-tundra boundary has generally lain to the south, extending across the interiors of the large continental land masses. To test the hypothesis of the weakened/strengthened feedback, I used an Earth System Model of Intermediate Complexity that consists of a dynamic terrestrial vegetation model coupled to a climate model. A set of time-slice experiments with different orbital and greenhouse gas concentrations were analyzed. In one set of experiments, the feedback gain with respect to annual average top-of-atmosphere net short wave radiation due to vegetation was 1.42 for modern conditions but only 1.14 for the mid-Pliocene. Additionally, we compared experiments with different shortwave-radiation parameterizations, which differed in the amount of shortwave energy flux reaching the surface (and subsequently affecting vegetative biomass). These techniques allowed us to isolate the mechanisms responsible for the varying strength of the forest-tundra snow albedo feedback. The results also show that many factors affect the strength of feedback. In this presentation I will concentrate on the availability of land for conversion of forest to tundra (and vice versa), cloud cover near the forest-tundra boundary, and the integrated surface insolation contrast between tundra and forest during the snow-covered season.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86490", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86491" } }
{"authors":"Darin Desilets::Hydroinnova LLC--", "title":"H51I-1497: Arctic Observations of Snow Water Equivalent with the Non-Contact Cosmic Ray Method", "abstract":"Snow plays a key role in the land surface energy budget, but accurate and spatially representative measurements are notoriously difficult to obtain, even in the most ideal circumstances. Snow data are particulalry lacking in the Arctic, where conditions are far from ideal, and where conventional technologies, including precipitation sensors, fail. The cosmic-ray technique, which has been successful in monitoring soil moisture, is also a promising way to measure snow water equivalent (SWE) depth in the Arctic. Because it has a large footprint (100s of meters in diameter) a cosmic-ray probe can average spatial heterogeneities, for example due to drifting snow, providing a big advantange over point sensors. Because it is non-invasive, it is well suited for mobile surveys. But does it work? Recent results from a tundra site near Barrow, Alaska show that the sensor is physically robust over the arctic winter, and yields reasonable SWE data. Snow pack built up gradually during the course of the winter, reaching a maximum of 2 cm SWE in mid May. I show how a cosmic-ray probe can be used in a mobile application, thus making it an an invaluable contribution to a ground-based Arctic observing platform.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86491", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86492" } }
{"authors":"Ashar Ali::University of Colorado at Boulder--Scot Elkington::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--", "title":"SM21A-2463: Azimuthal ULF Structure and Radial Transport of Charged Particles", "abstract":"The Van Allen radiation belts contain highly energetic particles which interact with a variety of plasma and MHD waves. Waves with frequencies in the ULF range are understood to play an important role in loss and acceleration of energetic particles. There is still much to be understood about the interaction between charged particles and ULF waves in the inner magnetosphere and how they influence particle diffusion. We investigate how ULF wave power distribution in azimuth affects radial diffusion of charged particles. Analytic treatments of the diffusion coefficients generally assume uniform distribution of power in azimuth but in situ measurements suggest otherwise. The power profiles obtained from in situ measurements will be used to conduct particle simulations to see how well do the simulated diffusion coefficients agree with diffusion coefficients estimated directly from in situ measurements. We also look at the ULF wave power distribution across different modes. In order to use in situ point measurements from spacecraft, it is typically assumed that all of the wave power exists in m=1 mode. How valid is this assumption? Do higher modes contain a major fraction of the total power? If yes, then under what conditions? One strategy is to use the obtained realistic azimuthal power profiles from in situ measurements (such as from the Van Allen Probes) to drive simulations and see how the power distributions across modes larger than one depends on parameters such as the level of geomagnetic activity.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86492", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86493" } }
{"authors":"Tyler Mackey::University of California Davis--Sasha Leidman::University of California Davis--Brian Allen::University of California Davis--Ian Hawes::University of Canterbury--Justin Lawrence::University of California Davis--Anne Jungblut::The Natural History Museum--Megan Krusor::University of California Davis--Lucy Coleman::Twelve Bridges Middle School--Dawn Sumner::University of California, Davis--", "title":"C41D-0726: Characterizing Microbial Mat Morphology with Structure from Motion Techniques in Ice-Covered Lake Joyce, McMurdo Dry Valleys, Antarctica", "abstract":"Structure from Motion (SFM) techniques can provide quantitative morphological documentation of otherwise inaccessible benthic ecosystems such as microbial mats in Lake Joyce, a perennially ice-covered lake of the Antarctic McMurdo Dry Valleys (MDV). Microbial mats are a key ecosystem of MDV lakes, and diverse mat morphologies like pinnacles emerge from interactions among microbial behavior, mineralization, and environmental conditions. Environmental gradients can be isolated to test mat growth models, but assessment of mat morphology along these gradients is complicated by their inaccessibility: the Lake Joyce ice cover is 4-5 m thick, water depths containing diverse pinnacle morphologies are 9-14 m, and relevant mat features are cm-scale. In order to map mat pinnacle morphology in different sedimentary settings, we deployed drop cameras (SeaViewer and GoPro) through 29 GPS referenced drill holes clustered into six stations along a transect spanning 880 m. Once under the ice cover, a boom containing a second GoPro camera was unfurled and rotated to collect oblique images of the benthic mats within dm of the mat-water interface. This setup allowed imaging from all sides over a ~1.5 m diameter area of the lake bottom. Underwater lens parameters were determined for each camera in Agisoft Lens; images were reconstructed and oriented in space with the SFM software Agisoft Photoscan, using the drop camera axis of rotation as up. The reconstructions were compared to downward facing images to assess accuracy, and similar images of an object with known geometry provided a test for expected error in reconstructions. Downward facing images identify decreasing pinnacle abundance in higher sedimentation settings, and quantitative measurements of 3D reconstructions in KeckCAVES LidarViewer supplement these mat morphological facies with measurements of pinnacle height and orientation. Reconstructions also help isolate confounding variables for mat facies trends with measurements of lake bottom slope and underlying relief that could influence pinnacle growth. Comparison of 3D reconstructions to downward-facing drop camera images demonstrate that SFM is a powerful tool for documenting diverse mat morphologies across environmental gradients in ice-covered lakes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86493", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86494" } }
{"authors":"Zhongwen Yang::College of Water Sciences, Key Laboratory of Water and Sediment Sciences of Ministry of Education, Beijing Normal University--Kuo-lin Hsu::University of California Irvine--Soroosh Sorooshian::University of California Irvine--Xinyi Xu::College of Water Sciences, Key Laboratory of Water and Sediment Sciences of Ministry of Education, Beijing Normal University--Dan Braithwaite::University of California Irvine--Koen Verbist::UNESCO-IHP, Hydrological Systems and Global Change section nternational Centre for Eremology, Department of Soil Management, Ghent University--", "title":"H13H-1667: Merging PERSIANN-CCS Satellite-based Rainfall Data and Pointwise Gauge Measurements over Chile", "abstract":"Satellite-based Precipitation Estimates (SPEs) are promising alternative rainfall data for climatic and hydrological applications, due to their ability to estimate precipitation for regions where ground-based observations are limited. However, existing satellite-based rainfall estimations are subject to systematic biases. It is widely recommended that the ground-based gauge can provide reliable precipitation measurement, while uncertainty from gauges increases when the precipitation estimation is extended from the point scale to a spatial coverage. This study aims to provide a high-quality rainfall data set over Chile, by merging the Precipitation Estimation from Remotely Sensed Information using Artificial Neural Networks–Cloud Classification System (PERSIANN-CCS) rainfall retrievals and point-wise gauge observations. The PERSIANN-CCS (0.04°×0.04°) and gauged rainfall data (daily) are merged together for the period of 2009-2014. Two steps are associated in this work: 1) the non-parametric Quantile Mapping approach and Gaussian Weighting (GW) interpolation are used to remove the biases in the satellite rainfalls; 2) the gauge measurement is gridded with the GW interpolation, and the bias-corrected satellite and gridded gauge data sets are combined according to weighting factors estimated at each satellite grid. The weighting factors indicate the accuracy of the two data sets, respectively. The results show that the merged precipitation associates high data quality. The spatial patterns of the merged satellite rainfall have good consistency to the gauge observations, which is evidenced with significantly reduced root-mean-square errors (RMSEs) and mean biases (BIASs). At both monthly and daily scales, the performance of the merged rainfall time series, are significantly improved, in terms of the correlation coefficients (CORRs), RMSEs, and BIASs. This study serves as a valuable reference for the bias-correction of existing SPEs with gauge observations worldwide.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86494", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86495" } }
{"authors":"G. Burch Fisher::University of Texas at Austin--William Amidon::Middlebury College--Lisa Luna::Middlebury College--Douglas Burbank::University of California Santa Barbara--", "title":"T13C-3009: Tectonic and Climatic Implications of Late Miocene to Pleistocene (5.8-1.8 Ma) Paleo-Erosion Rates from the Rio Iruya Canyon, Northwest Argentina (23°S)", "abstract":"One fundamental hypothesis that underpins tectonic geomorphology is that climate can modify the pattern and magnitude of erosion in orogenic landscapes and in turn control deformation. While conceptually appealing, empirical evidence is often ambiguous owing to the inherent spatial coupling between present-day tectonic and precipitation maxima and/or the long-term blurring of climate signals by thermochronologic techniques. Although cosmogenic nuclides provide considerable insight into centennial to millennial scale tectonic-erosion-climate linkages, extracting long-term records of erosion from older sedimentary deposits has proved challenging. If successful, such records have the potential to reveal long-term relationships between erosion, uplift, and climate, which should integrate over time to match long term exhumation rates obtained from low temperature thermochronology. Here we utilize a unique field setting along a 100-m deep, young canyon (~100 years old) along the Rio Iruya in northwestern Argentina to create a high-resolution (~100 kyr) terrestrial record of paleo-erosion rates in the eastern Cordillera spanning the late Miocene to Pleistocene (5.8-1.8 Mya). In total, 49 cosmogenic 10Be samples were analyzed along with detailed magnetostratigraphy, U-Pb tephra ages, detrital zircon, and quartz trace elements to yield a detailed paleo-erosion rate, chronology, and provenance record for the Rio Iruya section. Apparent erosion rates occur in three different regimes: from 5.8-4.0 Ma rates are high with little variability, from 4.0- 2.3 Ma rates oscillate by a factor of 5 on a ~400 kyr timescale, and from 2.3-1.8 Ma they are again high without clear oscillations. These three regimes correspond to changes in provenance recorded by detrital zircons and quartz chemistry, and suggest that during the late Pliocene the eastern Cordillera was responding strongly to the 400 kyr eccentricity paced orbital frequency. This unique finding is both perplexing and encouraging as it argues for a coupling of sediment flux to broad-scale climate teleconnections and may evidence a frequency dependent response of the Andean orogen to climate oscillations, consistent with recent numerical and theoretical models.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86495", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86496" } }
{"authors":"Anja Rutishauser::University of Alberta--Cyril Grima::Institute for Geophysics--Martin Sharp::University of Alberta--Donald Blankenship::Institute for Geophysics--Duncan Young::University of Texas, Institute for Geophysics--Julian Dowdeswell::Scott Polar Research Institute--", "title":"C41D-0766: The use of airborne radar reflectometry to characterize near-surface snow/firn stratigraphy on Devon Ice Cap, Canadian Arctic: A path to identifying refrozen melt layers", "abstract":"Under present warming conditions, summer surface melt has been observed to intensify and shift towards higher elevations in the accumulation zones of Canadian Arctic ice caps. Consequently, more meltwater percolates into the near surface snow and firn, and refreezes as ice layers. This process can lead to a significant increase in firn densification rates. Knowledge of spatiotemporal variations of the near-surface firn density, especially the distribution of ice layer formation is of great importance when assessing mass change estimates from repeat altimetry measurements. Here, we present an approach for characterizing the near-surface firn stratigraphy and determining the spatial distribution of refrozen melt layers on Devon Ice Cap, using the surface echo from airborne radio-echo sounding (RES) measurements. The RES surface echo is affected by the upper few meters of snow/firn/ice and thus contains information about the near-surface properties. More specifically, the radar surface return is a combination of a coherent (Pc) and a scattering signal component (Pn). Pc is related to the dielectric constant of the probed surface, whereas Pn is related to the near surface roughness. Hence, different near-surface snow/firn properties can be investigated by analyzing the signal components Pc and Pn and their spatial variability. The Radar Statistical Reconnaissance (RSR) methodology [1] allows the extraction of Pc and Pn from the surface radar return, which then can be used to compute near-surface roughness and firn density estimates. We apply the RSR method to RES data collected on Devon Ice Cap and determine Pc and Pn values. We then compare the results to ground based RES measurements and shallow firn cores (~11 m deep) collected along the airborne RES flight lines. This comparison shows that variations in the scattering coefficient Pn correlate to changes in the pattern of near-surface firn stratigraphy revealed by the ground based RES data and firn cores. Based on these results, we establish an interpretation scheme for RSR results over ice caps and glaciers with complex melting and refreezing firn stratigraphy, which offers a new and fast way of studying the near-surface firn properties, especially to identify refrozen ice layers. [1] Grima, C. et al. 2013, Planetary and Space Science.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86496", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86497" } }
{"authors":"Leon Johnson::Medgar Evers College, CUNY--Shermane Austin::Medgar Evers College, CUNY--Armando Howard::NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies Medgar Evers College, CUNY--Christopher Boxe::Medgar Evers College of the City University of New York CUNY Graduate Center, Chemistry Division, Earth and Environmental Science Division,--Michael Jiang::Medgar Evers College Prep School Medgar Evers College, CUNY--Taran Tulsee::Medgar Evers College, CUNY--Ying Chow::Medgar Evers College, CUNY--Rosa Zavala-Gutierrez::Medgar Evers College, CUNY--Rita Barley::Medgar Evers College, CUNY--Bulat Filin::Medgar Evers College, CUNY--Kevin Brathwaite::Manhattan Transit High School Medgar Evers College, CUNY--", "title":"ED31B-0893: Increasing Diversity in Global Climate Change, Space Weather and Space Technology Research and Education", "abstract":"This presentation describes projects at Medgar Evers College of the City University of New York that contribute to the preparation of a diverse workforce in the areas of ocean modeling, planetary atmospheres, space weather and space technology. Specific projects incorporating both undergraduate and high school students include Assessing Parameterizations of Energy Input to Internal Ocean Mixing, Reaction Rate Uncertainty on Mars Atmospheric Ozone, Remote Sensing of Solar Active Regions and Intelligent Software for Nano-satellites. These projects are accompanied by a newly developed Computational Earth and Space Science course to provide additional background on methodologies and tools for scientific data analysis. This program is supported by NSF award AGS-1359293 REU Site: CUNY/GISS Center for Global Climate Research and the NASA New York State Space Grant Consortium.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86497", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86498" } }
{"authors":"Pratik Joshi::Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University--", "title":"A43B-0281: Harmonic regression based multi-temporal cloud filtering algorithm for Landsat 8 ", "abstract":"Landsat data archive though rich is seen to have missing dates and periods owing to the weather irregularities and inconsistent coverage. The satellite images are further subject to cloud cover effects resulting in erroneous analysis and observations of ground features. In earlier studies the change detection algorithm using statistical control charts on harmonic residuals of multi-temporal Landsat 5 data have been shown to detect few prominent remnant clouds [Brooks, Evan B., et al, 2014]. So, in this work we build on this harmonic regression approach to detect and filter clouds using a multi-temporal series of Landsat 8 images. Firstly, we compute the harmonic coefficients using the fitting models on annual training data. This time series of residuals is further subjected to Shewhart X-bar control charts which signal the deviations of cloud points from the fitted multi-temporal fourier curve. For the process with standard deviation σ we found the second and third order harmonic regression with a x-bar chart control limit [Lσ] ranging between [0.5σ < Lσ < σ] as most efficient in detecting clouds. By implementing second order harmonic regression with successive x-bar chart control limits of L and 0.5 L on the NDVI, NDSI and haze optimized transformation (HOT), and utilizing the seasonal physical properties of these parameters, we have designed a novel multi-temporal algorithm for filtering clouds from Landsat 8 images. The method is applied to Virginia and Alabama in Landsat8 UTM zones 17 and 16 respectively. Our algorithm efficiently filters all types of cloud cover with an overall accuracy greater than 90%. As a result of the multi-temporal operation and the ability to recreate the multi-temporal database of images using only the coefficients of the fourier regression, our algorithm is largely storage and time efficient. The results show a good potential for this multi-temporal approach for cloud detection as a timely and targeted solution for the Landsat 8 research community, catering to the need for innovative processing solutions in the infant stage of the satellite. ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86498", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86499" } }
{"authors":"Timothy Scheibe::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Xiaofan Yang::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Xingyuan Chen::Joint Global Change Research Institute--Glenn Hammond::Sandia National Laboratories--", "title":"B41A-0406: A Hybrid Multiscale Framework for Subsurface Flow and Transport Simulations", "abstract":"Extensive research efforts have been invested in reducing model errors to improve the predictive ability of biogeochemical earth and environmental system simulators, with applications ranging from contaminant transport and remediation to impacts of biogeochemical elemental cycling (e.g., carbon and nitrogen) on local ecosystems and regional to global climate. While improved process understanding can be achieved through scientific study, such understanding is usually developed at small scales. Process-based numerical models are typically designed for a particular characteristic length and time scale. For application-relevant scales, it is generally necessary to introduce approximations and empirical parameterizations to describe complex systems or processes. This single-scale approach has been the best available to date because of limited understanding of process coupling combined with practical limitations on system characterization and computation. The application of advanced computational resources, new scientific process descriptions, and state-of-the-art characterization methods to advance predictive understanding of the larger system behavior requires the development of multiscale simulators. Accordingly there has been much recent interest in novel multiscale methods in which microscale and macroscale models are explicitly coupled in a single hybrid multiscale simulation. A limited number of hybrid multiscale simulations have been developed for biogeochemical earth systems, but they mostly utilize application-specific and sometimes ad-hoc approaches for model coupling. We are developing a generalized approach to hierarchical model coupling designed for high-performance computational systems. In this presentation we will describe the generalized approach and provide two example implementations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86499", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86500" } }
{"authors":"Robert Swap::University of Virginia Main Campus--Kent Wayland::University of Virginia Main Campus--", "title":"ED34B-04: STEM-related, Student-led Service Learning / Community Engagement Projects: Examples and Benefits", "abstract":"Field-based, STEM-related service learning / community engagement projects present an opportunity for undergraduate students to demonstrate proficiencies related to the process of inquiry. These proficiencies include: appreciation of the larger project context, articulation of an informed question/hypothesis, project proposal development, interdisciplinary collaboration, project management (including planning, implementation reconfiguration and synthesis) and lastly the generation and handing off of acquired knowledge. Calls for these types of proficiencies have been expressed by governmental, non-governmental as well as the private sector. Accordingly, institutions of higher learning have viewed such activities as opportunities for enriching the learning experience for undergraduate students and for making such students more marketable, especially those from STEM-related fields. This institutional interest has provided an opportunity to support and expand field-based learning. Here we present examples of student-led/faculty-mentored international service learning and community engagement projects along the arc of preparation, implementation and post-field process. Representative examples that draw upon environmental science and engineering knowledge have been selected from more than 20 international undergraduate student projects over past decade and include: slow-sand water filtration, rainwater harvesting, methane biodigesters, water reticulation schemes and development and implementation of rocket stoves for communal cooking. We discuss these efforts in terms of the development of the aforementioned proficiencies, the utility of such proficiencies to the larger enterprise of STEM and the potential for transformative student learning outcomes. We share these experiences and lessons learned with the hope that others may intelligently borrow from our approach in a manner appropriate for their particular context.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86500", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86501" } }
{"authors":"Bowen Zhang::Auburn University--Hanqin Tian::Auburn University at Montgomery--Chaoqun Lu::Iowa State University--Jia Yang::Auburn University at Montgomery--Wei Ren::University of Kentucky--", "title":"GC33C-1313: Optimizing water management practices for enhancing rice production and mitigating greenhouse gas emissions in Asia: The food-water-climate nexus approach", "abstract":"Rice fields, supporting over half of the global population, consumed around 30% of the freshwater used for global crop growth and identified as one of the major methane (CH4) sources. Asia, in where 90% of rice is consumed, took over 90% of the total CH4 emission from the global rice field. With the increasing water scarcity and rapidly growth population, it is urgent to address how to simultaneously maintain or even increase food production, reduce water consumption, and benefit climate. In this study, we used a process-based model (Dynamic Land Ecosystem Model), which has the capability to simultaneously simulate the carbon, water, and nitrogen fluxes and storages within the terrestrial ecosystem, and also the exchanges of greenhouse gases between terrestrial ecosystems and the atmosphere, to quantify the magnitude, spatial and temporal variation of rice production and CH4 emissions under different water management practices. Simulated results have been evaluated against field observations, inventory-based and atmospheric inversion estimates. By implementing a set of experimental simulations, the results could provide insights for reasonable implementation of optimum water management practices, which is also crucial for policy maker to make trade-off decisions to increase yield and reduce GHG emissions through effective mitigation strategies.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86501", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86502" } }
{"authors":"Dev Niyogi::Purdue University--Xing Liu::Purdue University--Eugene Takle::Iowa State University--Christopher Anderson::Iowa State University--Jeff Andresen::Michigan State University--Gopal Alagarswamy::Michigan State University--Benjamin Gramig::Purdue University--Otto Doering::Purdue University--", "title":"GC54A-07: Impacts of climate change on corn yield and the length of corn growing season in U.S. Corn Belt", "abstract":"This study is a result of a USDA sponsored project titled Useful to Usable (U2U): “Transforming Climate Variability and Change Information for Cereal Crop Producers”. The objective of this project is to improve farm resilience and profitability in the U.S. Corn Belt region by transforming existing meteorological dataset into usable knowledge and tools for the agricultural community. In this study, we conducted the Hybrid-Maize corn growth simulation model at 18 sites across the U.S. Corn Belt with 5 CMIP5 (Coupled Model Intercomparison Project) climate models. The crop model was running for two time periods: 1981-2010 (‘current’) and 2041-2070 (‘future’). We also developed a “delta” method, which combines the current climate variability with the “mean” model projected climate change. The results indicate that under the ‘future’ climate, growing degree days (GDD) projected corn growing season (from planting date reach to maturity required GDD) are shortened due to the increasing of mean temperature. Compare to the contemporary simulations, the shorter growing season under “future” scenario brings lower attainable yields if farmers using the same cultivar. This presentation will focus on the details about the model simulations, the interactive process employed in developing the simulations, the implications of the results, the uncertainties, and the lessons learned.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86502", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86503" } }
{"authors":"Andrew Evans::Metropolitan State University of Denver--", "title":"C23A-0761: IMPACT OF CRITICAL ANION SOIL SOLUTION CONCENTRATION ON ALUMINUM ACTIVITY IN ALPINE TUNDRA SOIL Andrew Evans, Jr.1 , Michael B. Jacobs2, and Jason R. Janke1, (1) Metropolitan State University of Denver, Dept. of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, (2) Dept. of Chemistry, Denver, CO, United States.", "abstract":"Soil solution anionic composition can impact both plant and microbial activity in alpine tundra soils by altering biochemical cycling within the soil, either through base cation leaching, or shifts in aluminum controlling solid phases. Although anions play a critical role in the aqueous speciation of metals, relatively few high altitude field studies have examined their impact on aluminum controlling solid phases and aluminum speciation in soil water. For this study, thirty sampling sites were selected on Trail Ridge Road in Rocky Mountain National Park, Estes Park, CO, and sampled during July, the middle of the growing season. Sampling elevations ranged from approximately 3560 – 3710 m. Soil samples were collected to a depth of 15.24 cm, and the anions were extracted using a 2:1 D.I. water to soil ratio. Filtered extracts were analyzed using IC and ICP-MS. Soil solution NO3- concentrations were significantly higher for sampling locations east of Iceberg Pass (EIBP) (mean = 86.94 ± 119.8 mg/L) compared to locations west of Iceberg Pass (WIBP) (mean 1.481 ± 2.444 mg/L). Both F- and PO43- soil solution concentrations, 0.533 and 0.440 mg/L, respectively, were substantially lower, for sampling sites located EIBP, while locations WIBP averaged 0.773 and 0.829 mg/L respectively, for F- and PO43-. Sulfate concentration averaged 3.869 ± 3.059 mg/L for locations EIBP, and 3.891 ± 3.1970 for locations WIBP. Geochemical modeling of Al3+ in the soil solution indicated that a suite of aluminum hydroxyl sulfate minerals controlled Al3+ activity in the alpine tundra soil, with shifts between controlling solid phases occurring in the presence of elevated F- concentrations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86503", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86504" } }
{"authors":"Fred Moshary::The City College of New York CUNY-NOAA CREST--Yonghua Wu::CUNY-NOAA CREST--Zaw Han::CUNY-NOAA CREST CUNY City College--Chowdhury Nazmi::The City College of New York CUNY-NOAA CREST--Barry Gross::CUNY-NOAA CREST The City College of New York--", "title":"A23C-0336: Observation of Dust and Smoke Plume Transport and Impact on Remote Sensing of Air Quality in New York City", "abstract":"Long-range transport of aloft aerosol plumes affects both air quality and climate on regional and continental scales. Asian dust impacts on the western US and Canada have been extensively analyzed, yet such quantitative demonstrations are not well documented in the northeastern US. Similarly, episodes of continental transport of smoke plumes from forest fires in western US and Canada impact visibility and air quality in the US east coast. In this study, we present the synergistic observation of transported dust and smoke aerosol plumes in New York City (NYC, 40.821ºN, 73.949ºW), using a combination of a ground-based multiple-wavelength lidar, a CIMEL sunphotometer/radiometer, satellite sensors such as CALIOP and MODIS/VIIRS, and NAAPS aerosol forecast model. We show case studies of trans-Pacific Asian dust transport to the northeast US driven by the strong western or polar jets. The potential impact of the plumes on the local air quality is indicated by the plumes mixing down into boundary layer and the coincident increase of the ground PM measurement. Using multi-year lidar and sunphotometer observations, range-resolved monthly occurrence frequency of aloft aerosol plumes and modification of local aerosol optical properties are presented. The transport paths and the optical properties of aerosol for each clustered path are characterized. We further demonstrate the impact of these aloft plumes on the surface PM2.5 estimates from MODIS and VIIRS derived aerosol optical depth (AOD), and observe that when the aloft plumes-layer AODs are filtered out using lidar, the correlation between AOD-PM2.5 is much improved.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86504", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86505" } }
{"authors":"Michael Strager::West Virginia University--Nicolas Zegre::West Virginia University--", "title":"H33H-1707: The Development of a Real Time Surface Water Flow Model to Protect Public Water Intakes in West Virginia", "abstract":"In January of 2014 West Virginia experienced a chemical spill upstream of a public water intake on the Elk River near Charleston, West Virginia that made the water unusable for 300,000 people for weeks. In response to this disaster, state officials enacted legislation to protect the future public water intake locations by requiring the delineation of zones of critical concern that extend a five hour travel time above the intakes. Each zone is defined by the travel time and buffered along the river mainstem and tributary locations to identify future potential threats to the water supply. While this approach helps to identify potential problems before they occur, the need existed to be able to respond to a spill with information regarding the real travel time of a spill to an intake with consideration of actual stream flow at the time of the spill. This study developed a real time surface flow model to protect the public water intakes using both regional and seasonal variables. Bayesian statistical inference enabled confidence levels to be placed on flow estimates and used to show the probability for the time steps as water approached an public water intake. The flow model has been incorporated into both a smartphone app and web-based tool for better emergency response and management of water resources throughout the state.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86505", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86506" } }
{"authors":"Chad Madsen::Boston University--Hui Tian::SAO--Edward DeLuca::SAO--", "title":"SH31B-2414: Observations of Small-scale IRIS Bombs (Reconnection Events) in an Evolving Active Region", "abstract":"We present the first Interface Region Imaging Spectrograph (IRIS) observations of small-scale bombs evolving with their host active region. Bombs appear most clearly in the IRIS 1330 Å and 1400 Å slit-jaw images as small (~1 arcsec), compact, intense brightenings at transition region temperatures. Their NUV/FUV emission spectra exhibit dramatic line splitting and strong absorption features indicative of bidirectional flows from magnetic reconnection embedded deep within the cool lower solar atmosphere. The bombs may contribute significantly to the heating of the solar atmosphere in active regions; however, it’s unclear how prevalent the bombs are throughout the lifetime of an active region. Using a semi-automated detection method, we locate bombs within AR 11850 over the course of four observations from 06:00 UT on September 25, 2013 until 11:30 UT the next day. The active region is first observed in an emerging phase and rapidly grows into a mature active region with well-developed sunspots. The bomb occurrence rate drops dramatically as the active region fully emerges. We also find that the bombs fall into two distinct populations: one appears largely during active region emergence and contains a majority of the bombs, while the other population is present regardless of active region age. The first population of bombs is typically found embedded in the low-lying loops prominent in the young active region. Furthermore, we use Solar Dynamics Observatory/Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (SDO/HMI) line-of-sight magnetograms to show that the bombs associated with the first population occur at the boundaries between the upward and downward flux of small, isolated bipolar regions. These regions dissipate as the active region emerges and reconfigures its magnetic field into two large network patches of upward and downward flux with a clear inversion line. The second, smaller population of bombs usually occurs far from the active region loop structures in the plage and sunspot penumbrae. They are associated with the boundaries between strong upward or downward flux and regions where the magnetic field is perpendicular to the line of sight.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86506", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86507" } }
{"authors":"Hong Thio::AECOM--Jascha Polet::California State Polytechnic University Pomona--Kenny Ryan::University of California Riverside--", "title":"NH23A-1873: Using DART-recorded Rayleigh waves for rapid CMT and finite fault analyses of large megathrust earthquakes.", "abstract":"We study the use of long-period Rayleigh waves recorded by the DART-type ocean bottom pressure sensors. The determination of accurate moment and slip distribution after a megathrust subduction zone earthquake is essential for tsunami early warning. The two main reasons why the DART data are o interest to this problem are; 1 – contrary to the broadband data used in the early stages of earthquake analysis, the DART data do not saturate for large magnitude earthquakes, and 2 – DART stations are located offshore and thus often fill gaps in the instrumental coverage at local and regional distances. Thus, by including DART recorded Rayleigh waves into the rapid response systems we may be able to gain valuable time in determining accurate moment estimates and slip distributions needed for tsunami warning and other rapid response products. Large megathrust earthquakes are among the most destructive natural disasters in history but also pose a significant challenge real-time analysis. The scales involved in such large earthquakes, with ruptures as long as a thousand kilometers and durations of several minutes are formidable. There are still issues with rapid analysis at the short timescales, such as minutes after the event since many of the nearby seismic stations will saturate due to the large ground motions. Also, on the seaward side of megathrust earthquakes, the nearest seismic stations are often thousands of kilometers away on oceanic islands. The deployment of DART buoys can fill this gap, since these instruments do not saturate and are located close in on the seaward side of the megathrusts. We are evaluating the use of DART-recorded Rayleigh waves, by including them in the dataset used for Centroid Moment Tensor analyses, and by using the near-field DART stations to constrain source finiteness for megathrust earthquakes such as the recent Tohoku, Haida Gwaii and Chile earthquakes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86507", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86508" } }
{"authors":"Ataru Sakuraba::University of Tokyo--", "title":"S51D-2732: Surface Waves and Flow-Induced Oscillations along an Underground Elliptic Cylinder Filled with a Viscous Fluid", "abstract":"I made a linear analysis of flow-induced oscillations along an underground cylindrical conduit with an elliptical cross section on the basis of the hypothesis that volcanic tremor is a result of magma movement through a conduit. As a first step to understand how the self oscillation occurs because of magma flow, I investigated surface wave propagation and attenuation along an infinitely long fluid-filled elliptic cylinder in an elastic medium. The boundary element method is used to obtain the two-dimensional wave field around the ellipse in the frequency-wavenumber domain. When the major axis is much greater than the minor axis of the ellipse, we obtain the analytic form of the dispersion relation of both the crack-wave mode (Korneev 2008, Lipovsky & Dunham 2015) and the Rayleigh-wave mode with flexural deformation. The crack-wave mode generally has a slower phase speed and a higher attenuation than the Rayleigh-wave mode. In the long-wavelength limit, the crack-wave mode disappears because of fluid viscosity, but the Rayleigh-wave mode exists with a constant Q-value that depends on viscosity. When the aspect ratio of the ellipse is finite, the surface waves can basically be understood as those propagating along a fluid pipe. The flexural mode does exist even when the wavelength is much longer than the major axis, but its phase speed coincides with that of the surrounding S-wave (Randall 1991). As its attenuation is zero in the long-wavelength limit, the flexural mode differs in nature from surface wave. I also obtain a result on linear stability of viscous flow through an elliptic cylinder. In this analysis, I made an assumption that the fluid inertia is so small that the Stokes equation can be used. As suggested by the author’s previous study (Sakuraba & Yamauchi 2014), the flexural (Rayleigh-wave) mode is destabilized at a critical flow speed that decreases with the wavelength. However, when the wavelength is much greater than the major axis of the ellipse, the unstable solution does exist, but its linear growth rate in amplitude becomes almost zero. Therefore, the unstable solution effectively disappears in the long-wavelength limit, suggesting that the aspect ratio of the conduit is needed to be sufficiently large if the flow-induced oscillation caused by a moderate magma speed is an origin of volcanic tremor.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86508", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86509" } }
{"authors":"Lawrence Strow::University of Maryland Baltimore County--Sergio Desouza-Machado::University of Maryland Baltimore County--Christopher Hepplewhite::Joint Center for Earth Systems Technology--Howard Motteler::Joint Center for Earth Systems Technology--", "title":"A14C-08: An Infrared Radiance Climate Record Combining AIRS and CrIS", "abstract":"A continuous hyperspectral infrared radiance record of the Earth's emission started with AIRS in 2002 in the 1:30 orbit, supplemented since 2012 with the SNPP-CrIS sensor, which is the first of at least three planned sensors. This series of sensors is now well into their second decade of operation, and will soon provide a wide range of climate trends. Here we describe an approach for deriving climate level trends in a homogenous radiance record that starts with AIRS and is continued with the CrIS series of sensors. This approach converts the L1b AIRS radiance record to the CrIS sensor grid and spectral resolution, providing a long-term radiance record with accuracies limited by the stability of the individual instrumnents, our ability to convert AIRS radiances to the CrIS spectral grid, and the corrections for radiometric offsets between these sensors. We will examine decadal radiance trends, which are converted to geophysical trends using a simple, all-sky, optimal estimation retrieval with traceable error characteristics. These results will be compared to zonally averaged temperature and water vapor profile otrends derived from the ERA Interim reanalysis, the MERRA reanalysis, and the NASA AIRS Level 3 products.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86509", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86510" } }
{"authors":"Alex Aved::Air Force Research Laboratory Rome--Erik Blasch::Air Force Research Laboratory Rome--Jing Peng::Montclair State University--", "title":"IN53B-1843: A Difference Criterion for Dimensionality Reduction", "abstract":"A dynamic data-driven geoscience application includes hyperspectral scene classification which has shown promising potential in many remote-sensing applications. A hyperspectral image of a scene spectral radiance is typically measured by hundreds of contiguous spectral bands or features, ranging from visible/near-infrared (VNIR) to shortwave infrared (SWIR). Spectral-reflectance measurements provide rich information for object detection and classification. On the other hand, they generate a large number of features, resulting in a high dimensional measurement space. However, a large number of features often poses challenges and can result in poor classification performance. This is due to the curse of dimensionality which requires model reduction, uncertainty quantification and optimization for real-world applications. In such situations, feature extraction or selection methods play an important role by significantly reducing the number of features for building classifiers. In this work, we focus on efficient feature extraction using the dynamic data-driven applications systems (DDDAS) paradigm. Many dimension reduction techniques have been proposed in the literature. A well-known technique is Fisher's linear discriminant analysis (LDA). LDA finds the projection matrix that simultaneously maximizes a within class scatter matrix and minimizes a between class scatter matrix. However, LDA requires matrix inverse which can be a major issue when the within matrix is singular. We propose a difference criterion for dimension reduction that does not require a matrix inverse for software implementation. We show how to solve the optimization problem with semi-definite programming. In addition, we establish an error bound for the proposed algorithm. We demonstrate the connection between relief feature selection and a two class formulation of multi-class problems, thereby providing a sound basis for observed benefits associated with this formulation. Finally, we provide experimental results demonstrating that the proposed technique is competitive against competing methods in a number of hyperspectral image data that is broadly applicable to geoscience applications.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86510", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86511" } }
{"authors":"Donald Forbes::Geological Survey of Canada--Dustin Whalen::Geological Survey of Canada--Paul Fraser::Geological Survey of Canada--", "title":"PA13A-2178: Sharing Remote and Local Information for Tracking Spring Breakup in the Mackenzie Delta and Beaufort Sea", "abstract":"The Mackenzie Delta is the second largest on the Arctic Ocean, covering 13 000 km2. The annual flood regime in the delta is dominated by the spring snowmelt freshet and associated ice breakup, as water from the south arrives in the ice-covered delta and spreads over bottomfast and adjacent floating sea ice at the delta front. The complex processes of water-ice interaction, flow partitioning, and overbank flooding to replenish waters in 43 000 delta lakes threaten community, transportation, subsistence, and energy infrastructure in the delta. The annual breakup season is a time of rejuvenation, excitement, and anxiety for delta residents and stakeholders. To track the progress of breakup and meet the need for knowledge dissemination to the local communities, a Mackenzie-Beaufort breakup newsletter has been produced by Natural Resources Canada on a quasi-daily basis during the May-June spring flood season for 10 years, and distributed to an e-mail list that grew to over 300 subscribers. This provides near real-time tracking of water levels and breakup using on-line gauges (Environment Canada), daily MODIS satellite imagery (NASA), Landsat imagery (USGS) and intermittent radar imagery (various sources). In earlier years, information was also supplied from field programs operating in the delta during breakup, but changing priorities and funding have reduced the number of outside researchers present during these critical weeks. Meanwhile the number of local contributors has grown, providing observations and photographs to share with the local, regional and global readership. In this way the newsletter evolved into a two-way communication tool and community portal. The newsletter is a chronicle of each breakup season and a key resource for territorial and municipal managers, subsistence organizations, and emergency response agencies, with routine requests for specific imagery in areas of concern. With the completion of 10 years under the present model, we are exploring alternative approaches to enable more direct involvement in the region. The new model will be supported by the Circumpolar Coastal Communities Observatory Network (CACCON), Future Earth Coasts, and ArcticNet, and co-designed and co-managed with regional users to share timely information on the transformative event of each spring season in the delta.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86511", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86513" } }
{"authors":"SayyedHassan Tabatabaei::University of Arizona Shahrekord University--Hua Zhong::University of Arizona--Erin Abel::University of Arizona--Jim Field::The University of Arizona--Mark L. Brusseau::University of Arizona--", "title":"H31I-1557: Impact of Electron Donor selection on In-situ Biosequestration of Uranium", "abstract":"In-situ biosequestration, wherein electron-donating substrates are injected to promote microbial-associated sequestration of contaminants, is one promising enhanced-attenuation technique for remediation of groundwater containing arsenic, uranium, selenium, and similar constituents. A pilot-scale test of in-situ biosequestration for uranium in groundwater is in process at a former uranium mining site in Monument Valley, Arizona. Complementary bench experiments were conducted to examine the impact of different electron donors on the effectiveness of biosequestration. Aqueous and sediment samples were collected before and after the injection for monitoring changes in sediment properties, mineral geochemical composition, microbial community composition, and microbial activity.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86513", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86514" } }
{"authors":"Lotfi Ben-Jaffel::Institut d'Astrophysique de Paris--", "title":"SH41E-2409: The heliosphere neutrals composition: from Voyager UVS to IMAPS", "abstract":"For the last 35 years, the Voyagers (V) 1 and 2 ultraviolet spectrometers (UVS) data harvest has covered heliosphere sky-background in-situ measurements, stellar spectrophotometry, and outer planets encounters. Their long and ongoing operation period overlaps with many current and past ultraviolet missions, offering unique opportunities for cross-calibration with other spectrometers. Here we revisit the Voyager UVS calibration to assess the intriguing 243% (V1) and 156% (V2) sensitivity enhancements recently proposed. Using the Saturn Lyman-α airglow, observed in-situ by both Voyagers, and remotely by IUE, we match the Voyager values to IUE, taking into account the shape of the Saturn and sky-background Lyman-α lines observed with the Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph onboard the Hubble Space Telescope. For all known ranges of the interplanetary H I density, we show that the V1 and V2 UVS sensitivities at the Lyman-α channels cannot be enhanced by the amounts thus far proposed. Our prescription is to keep the original calibration of the Voyager UVS with an uncertainty that should not exceed 30%, making both instruments some of the most stable EUV/FUV spectrographs of the history of space exploration. This rich heritage from past and current space missions confirms that UV observations of the sky-background are a powerful lever for constraining the neutral composition and large structure of the heliosphere. It also points to the need in the future for fine Doppler-shift measurements and faint emissions detection in order to directly access the microphysical processes that drive the instant shape and composition of the heliosphere that is forced by the magnetized plasmas from solar wind and the local interstellar medium. Future deep space missions should thus include UV capabilities that make use of sensitive, high-resolution technology that allows achieving the highest throughput for extended light sources.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86514", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86515" } }
{"authors":"Marcelo Santos::University of New Brunswick--Thaleia Nikolaidou::University of New Brunswick--", "title":"G43C-07: Trends In Modelling Neutral-Atmospheric Electromagnetic Delays in a ‘Big Data’ World", "abstract":"Modelling the delay suffered by electromagnetic waves while they cross the neutral-atmosphere is of fundamental importance for several applications that help enhancing our understanding of the Earth system. Initially, this modelling was based on climatological models derived from sparse data sets. An improvement in models followed as more observing techniques became available, and denser networks started to be developed. Somehow in parallel, and more recently, investigation efforts started to be concentrated on the use of numerical weather prediction (NWP) models, from where neutral-atmospheric delay parameters can derived through ray-tracing. There are a few limitations in both approaches. Models based on climatology are based on sparse data covering a certain period of time, whereas NWP models although based on more realistic data, are provided on intervals that range several hours. A third way is about to be engaged, and it can be seen as a natural development due to an increase in the number of sensors and an enhancement of their geographical distribution, generating a continuous flow of data, being them both satellite-based and ground-based. The question that is posed ahead of us is on how to make use of these huge data sets, which will provide the best possible representation of the neutral-atmosphere at any given time, as readily and as accurately as possible. This situation fits well within what today is known as big data. This paper will explore and discuss scenarios that have potential to open new trends in modeling the neutral-atmospheric delay. They include near real-time empirical model updates, sequential improvement of Marini mapping function coefficients (e.g., within a VMF) and a self-feeding. The discussion and simulations that will be shown cover the whole planet. The pros and cons of each approach will be discussed in comparison with what is done today. Simulations show potential improvement of up to 25% under certain circumstances.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86515", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86516" } }
{"authors":"Jessica Connolly::Desert Research Institute Reno--Vera Samburova::Desert Research Institute Reno--Hans Moosmüller::Desert Research Institute--Andrey Khlystov::Desert Research Institute Reno--", "title":"A33D-0198: Analysis of Absorption Spectra of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Gaseous- and Particle- Phase Emissions from Peat Fuel Combustion Under Controlled Conditions", "abstract":"Biomass and fossil fuel burning processes emit important organic pollutants called polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) into the atmosphere. Smoldering combustion of peat is one of the largest contributors (up to 70%) of carbonaceous species and, therefore, it may be one of the main sources of these PAHs. PAHs can be detrimental to health, they are known to be potent mutagens and suspected carcinogens. They may also contribute to solar light absorption as the particles absorb in the blue and near ultraviolet (UV) region of the solar spectrum (“brown carbon” species). There is very little knowledge and large ambiguity regarding the contribution of PAHs to optical properties of organic carbon (OC) emitted from smoldering biomass combustion. This study focuses on quantifying and analyzing PAHs emitted from peat smoldering combustion to gain more knowledge on their optical properties. Five peat fuels collected in different regions of the world (Russia, USA) were burned under controlled conditions (e.g., relative humidity, combustion efficiency, fuel-moisture content) at the Desert Research Institute Biomass Burning facility (Reno, NV, USA). Combustion aerosols collected on TIGF filters followed by XAD resin cartridges were extracted and analyzed for gas-phase (semi-volatile) and particle-phase PAHs. Filter and XAD samples were extracted separately with dichloromethane followed by acetone using Accelerated Solvent Extractor (ACE 300, Dionex). To determine absorption properties, absorption spectra of extracts and standard PAHs were recorded between 190 and 900 nm with a UV/VIS spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer, Lambda 650). This poster will discuss the potential contribution of PAHs to brown carbon emitted from peat combustion and give a brief comparison with absorption spectra from biomass burning aerosols.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86516", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86517" } }
{"authors":"Julie Jastrow::Argonne National Laboratory--Victoria Burke::Argonne National Laboratory--Timothy Vugteveen::Argonne National Laboratory--Zhaosheng Fan::Argonne National Laboratory--Scott Hofmann::Argonne National Laboratory--Jeremy Lederhouse::Argonne National Laboratory--Roser Matamala::Argonne National Laboratory--Gary Michaelson::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Umakant Mishra::Argonne National Laboratory--Chien-Lu Ping::University of Alaska Fairbanks--", "title":"B31D-0618: Bioavailable Carbon and the Relative Degradation State of Organic Matter in Active Layer and Permafrost Soils", "abstract":"The decomposability of soil organic carbon (SOC) in permafrost regions is a key uncertainty in efforts to predict carbon release from thawing permafrost and its impacts. The cold and often wet environment is the dominant factor limiting decomposer activity, and soil organic matter is often preserved in a relatively undecomposed and uncomplexed state. Thus, the impacts of soil warming and permafrost thaw are likely to depend at least initially on the genesis and past history of organic matter degradation before its stabilization in permafrost. We compared the bioavailability and relative degradation state of SOC in active layer and permafrost soils from Arctic tundra in Alaska. To assess readily bioavailable SOC, we quantified salt (0.5 M K2SO4) extractable organic matter (SEOM), which correlates well with carbon mineralization rates in short-term soil incubations. To assess the relative degradation state of SOC, we used particle size fractionation to isolate fibric (coarse) from more degraded (fine) particulate organic matter (POM) and separated mineral-associated organic matter into silt- and clay-sized fractions. On average, bulk SOC concentrations in permafrost were lower than in comparable active layer horizons. Although SEOM represented a very small proportion of the bulk SOC, this proportion was greater in permafrost than in comparable active layer soils. A large proportion of bulk SOC was found in POM for all horizons. Even for mineral soils, about 40% of bulk SOC was in POM pools, indicating that organic matter in both active layer and permafrost mineral soils was relatively undecomposed compared to typical temperate soils. Not surprisingly, organic soils had a greater proportion of POM and mineral soils had greater silt- and clay-sized carbon pools, while cryoturbated soils were intermediate. For organic horizons, permafrost organic matter was generally more degraded than in comparable active layer horizons. However, in mineral and cryoturbated horizons, the presence of permafrost appeared to have little effect on SOC distribution among size fractions. Future studies will investigate the utility of using organic matter pools defined by SEOM and particle size to predict the bioavailable pools characterized through more time-consuming long-term incubation studies of permafrost region soils.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86517", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86518" } }
{"authors":"Mathieu Choukroun::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"P31E-2117: MIRO Observations of the Southern Regions of 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko: From Deep Polar Night, to Summer at Perihelion.", "abstract":"The high obliquity (50°) of 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko is responsible for a long-lasting winter polar night in the Southern regions of the nucleus. We report observations made with the submillimeter and millimeter continuum channels of the Microwave Instrument onboard the Rosetta Orbiter (MIRO) of the thermal emission from these regions since rendez-vous with the comet in August 2014. Prior to these observations, the Southern Polar Regions had been in darkness for approximately 5 years. Subsurface temperatures in the range 25-50 K were measured early in the mission. Thermal model calculations of the nucleus near-surface temperatures carried out over the 67P/C-G orbit, coupled with radiative transfer calculations of the MIRO channels brightness temperatures, suggest that these regions have a thermal inertia within the range 10-60 J.m-2.K-1.s-0.5. Such low thermal inertia values are consistent with a highly porous, dusty, regolith-like surface. These values are comparable to those derived elsewhere on the nucleus. Differences between the two channels are tentatively attributed to dielectric properties that differ significantly from the sunlit side, within the first few tens of centimeters. This was suggestive of the presence of ice(s) within the MIRO depths of investigation in the Southern Polar Regions early in the mission. As Rosetta pursues its observations of 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko through and after perihelion, we are revisiting analysis of MIRO thermal emission data of these regions, and their interpretation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86518", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86519" } }
{"authors":"Anuradha Kodali::Organization Not Listed--Ankush Khandelwal::University of Minnesota Twin Cities--Sangram Ganguly::NASA Ames Research Center--Joshua Bongard::University of Vermont--Kamalika Das::University of Maryland Baltimore County--", "title":"IN51A-1799: Regression based modeling of vegetation and climate variables for the Amazon rainforests", "abstract":"Both short-term (weather) and long-term (climate) variations in the atmosphere directly impact various ecosystems on earth. Forest ecosystems, especially tropical forests, are crucial as they are the largest reserves of terrestrial carbon sink. For example, the Amazon forests are a critical component of global carbon cycle storing about 100 billion tons of carbon in its woody biomass. There is a growing concern that these forests could succumb to precipitation reduction in a progressively warming climate, leading to release of significant amount of carbon in the atmosphere. Therefore, there is a need to accurately quantify the dependence of vegetation growth on different climate variables and obtain better estimates of drought-induced changes to atmospheric CO2. The availability of globally consistent climate and earth observation datasets have allowed global scale monitoring of various climate and vegetation variables such as precipitation, radiation, surface greenness, etc. Using these diverse datasets, we aim to quantify the magnitude and extent of ecosystem exposure, sensitivity and resilience to droughts in forests. The Amazon rainforests have undergone severe droughts twice in last decade (2005 and 2010), which makes them an ideal candidate for the regional scale analysis. Current studies on vegetation and climate relationships have mostly explored linear dependence due to computational and domain knowledge constraints. We explore a modeling technique called symbolic regression based on evolutionary computation that allows discovery of the dependency structure without any prior assumptions. In symbolic regression the population of possible solutions is defined via trees structures. Each tree represents a mathematical expression that includes pre-defined functions (mathematical operators) and terminal sets (independent variables from data). Selection of these sets is critical to computational efficiency and model accuracy. In this work we investigate appropriate function and terminal set choices for the symbolic regression based modeling of the effects of climate on Amazon vegetation. Additionally, we compare the predictive capability of the symbolic regression based model to baseline techniques such as linear regularized regression and support vector regression.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86519", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86521" } }
{"authors":"Sean Smith::Sen. George J. Mitchell Center University of Maine--Damian Brady::University of Maine--Kelly Cole::Texas A&M University--Stephen Jones::University of New Hampshire--Bridie McGreavy::University of Maine Sen. George J. Mitchell Center--Chris Petersen::College of the Atlantic--Derek Rothenheber::University of New Hampshire--Brianna Smith::University of Maine Sen. George J. Mitchell Center--Brett Gerard::University of Maine--Samuel Roy::University of Maine--", "title":"EP21C-0927: Downeast Drainage – Examining and Communicating the Dynamics of Bacteria Pollution Events in the Gulf of Maine", "abstract":"The New England Sustainability Consortium is an interdisciplinary NSF EPSCoR funded project organized to strengthen the connections between science and decision-making and to advance the practice of sustainability science. The project uses complementary research capacity at several institutions to examine watershed and estuarine processes linked to bacteria pollution affecting shellfish harvesting and beach water quality in the Gulf of Maine. A fundamental research target is the development of a better approach for the prediction of coastal bacteria pollution events that can cause losses in tourism and shellfishery revenue. Enhanced prediction and communication of the events require a simultaneous examination of watershed pollution sources, drainage systems, estuarine residence times and bacterial survival. Our presentation will summarize initial observations from our investigations and stakeholder engagement activities at two project reference sites located in Wells and Bar Harbor, Maine. These will include field measurements, watershed and estuarine modeling outcomes, and stakeholder engagement results that are framed to quantify and explain land-sea interactions linked to bacterial pollution events in locations with varied relief, hydrodynamics, and stakeholder communities.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86521", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86522" } }
{"authors":"Dylan McConnell::University of Melbourne--Tim Forcey::University of Melbourne--Mike Sandiford::University of Melbourne--", "title":"GC53C-1227: The value of electricity storage in energy-only electricity markets", "abstract":"Price volatility and the prospect of increasing renewable energy generation have raised interest in the potential opportunities for storage technologies in energy-only electricity markets. In this paper we explore the value of a price-taking storage device in such a market, the National Electricity Market (NEM) in Australia. Our analysis suggests that under optimal operation, there is little value in having more than six hours of storage in this market. However, the inability to perfectly forecast wholesale prices, particularly extreme price spikes, may warrant some additional storage. We found that storage devices effectively provide a similar service as peak generators (such as Open Cycle Gas Turbines) and are similarly dependent on and exposed to extreme price events, with revenue for a merchant generator highly skewed to a few days of the year. In contrast to previous studies, this results in the round trip efficiency of the storage being relatively insignificant. Financing using hedging strategies similar to a peak generator effectively reduces the variability of revenue and exposure of storage to extreme prices. Our case study demonstrates that storage may have a competitive advantage over other peaking generators on the NEM, due to its ability to earn revenue outside of extreme peak events. As a consequence the outlook for storage options on the NEM is dependent on volatility, in turn dependent on capacity requirements. Further to this, increased integration of renewable energy may both depend on storage and improve the outlook for storage in technologies in electricity markets.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86522", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86523" } }
{"authors":"Kristin Vogfjord::Icelandic Meteorological Office--", "title":"S44B-03: Mapping the Features of the Bárðarbunga 2014-2015 Rifting and Eruption Event; Magmatic Upwelling, Segmented Dyke, Caldera Subsidence", "abstract":"Bárðdarbunga volcano in Iceland had been showing signs of increasing microseismic activity for some years when in August 2014 the activity suddenly escalated. The seismicity, which had been confined NE of the caldera rim and in the fissure swarm NNE of the caldera, quickly spread south along the eastern rim and radially out of the SE corner of the caldera. At the outer margin of the central volcano the seismicity side-stepped and took a 90 degree turn towards NE and from there propagated 40 km in 12 days to Holuhraun, where an eruption started on the 14thday and continued for 5 months. The seismicity was accompanied by several meters of spreading representing a rifting episode in the NE fissure swarm along a segmented dyke intrusion. The seismicity defines 8 main vertical dyke segments whose distinctively different orientations are controlled by the tensional stress regime of the region and by the overburden pressure (Sigmundsson et al., 2015; Heimisson et al., this conference). At the same time the caldera subsided by 60 m and over 70 M>5, very long-period events of complex mechanisms occurred at the southern and northern caldera rims. Relative relocations and focal mechanisms of over 15 thousand microearthquakes are used to map details of the Bárðarbunga 2014-2015 episode, revealing (1) upwelling and pooling of magma under the southern end of the dyke, which may have played a critical role in enabling magma from Bárðarbunga to migrate into the dyke, (2) the lateral propagation of the dyke and its very detailed segmentation and (3) the fracture surfaces along the caldera rim extending from the near-surface down to several kilometers depth, defining a vertical plane along the southern rim, while at the northern margin the seismicity extends a few km outward from the rim, defining slightly outward dipping or northward stepping, segmented faulting surfaces. These surfaces may play a role in generating the complex mechanisms of the larger magnitude events.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86523", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86524" } }
{"authors":"Ronald Oliversen::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Dona Chathuni Kuruppuaratchi::Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University--Edwin Mierkiewicz::Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University--Nicholas Derr::University of Wisconsin Madison--Sara Rosborough::Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University--Margaret Gallant::Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University--Fred Roesler::University of Wisconsin Madison--", "title":"P53C-2128: Lunar Sodium and Potassium Exosphere in May 2014", "abstract":"We apply high resolution spectroscopy to investigate the lunar exosphere by measuring sodium and potassium spectral line profiles to determine the variations in exospheric effective temperatures and velocities. Observations were made at the National Solar Observatory McMath-Pierce Telescope during May 2014. Data were collected over several nights, centered on full moon (May 14) and covering a waxing phase angle of 67° to a waning phase angle of 75°. We used a dual-etalon Fabry-Perot spectrometer with a resolving power of 184,000 (1.63 km s-1) to measure the line widths and radial velocity shifts of the sodium D2 (5889.951 Å) and potassium D1 (7698.965 Å) emission lines. The field of view was 3 arcmin (~330 km) and positioned at several locations, each centered at 1.5 arcmin (~165 km) off the East and West sunlit limbs. The deconvolved line widths indicate significant differences between the sodium and potassium temperatures. The sodium line widths were mostly symmetric as a function of phase for both the waxing and waning phases. At phase angles > 40º (outside of the magnetotail) the full width half maximum (FWHM) line widths are 1.5 – 2.0 km s-1 or ~1500 K for FWHM = 1.75 km s-1. Inside the magnetotail (phase angle < 40º) and near full moon (phase angle ~6°), the FWHM increased to ~4 km s-1. The implied line width temperature is 8000 K, although some of the observed line width may be due to a dispersion in velocities from many contribution along the extended sodium tail. Unlike sodium, the potassium line widths are wider by 50% during the waxing phase compared to the waning phase at phases > 40º. The potassium temperatures pre-magnetotail passage are ~1000 K while the temperatures post-magnetotail passage are ~2000K. At phase angles < 40º, the potassium intensities decreased dramatically; on consecutive days, when the phase angle changed from 44º to 31º to 20º, the relative intensities dropped by 1.0:0.6:0.15. The potassium intensity in the East and West equatorial regions (latitude < 10º) were similar; however, the potassium intensity was brightest off the limb near Aristarchus (latitude ~24º), which was the crater we observed nearest the KREEP region. This work was partially supported by the NASA Planetary Astronomy programs, NNX11AE38G and NNX13AL30G.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86524", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86525" } }
{"authors":"Adam Burns::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Joshua Peschel::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--", "title":"IN33C-1815: Ground-Based Robotic Sensing of an Agricultural Sub-Canopy Environment", "abstract":"Airborne remote sensing is a useful method for measuring agricultural crop parameters over large areas; however, the approach becomes limited to above-canopy characterization as a crop matures due to reduced visual access of the sub-canopy environment. During the growth cycle of an agricultural crop, such as soybeans, the micrometeorology of the sub-canopy environment can significantly impact pod development and reduced yields may result. Larger-scale environmental conditions aside, the physical structure and configuration of the sub-canopy matrix will logically influence local climate conditions for a single plant; understanding the state and development of the sub-canopy could inform crop models and improve best practices but there are currently no low-cost methods to quantify the sub-canopy environment at a high spatial and temporal resolution over an entire growth cycle. This work describes the modification of a small tactical and semi-autonomous, ground-based robotic platform with sensors capable of mapping the physical structure of an agricultural row crop sub-canopy; a soybean crop is used as a case study. Point cloud data representing the sub-canopy structure are stored in LAS format and can be used for modeling and visualization in standard GIS software packages.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86525", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86526" } }
{"authors":"Manoj Mathew::Universiti Teknologi PETRONAS--David Menier::University of South Brittany--Manuel Pubellier::CNRS--Francois Sapin::Total--Numair Siddiqui::Universiti Teknologi PETRONAS--Benjamin Sautter::Ecole Normale Supérieure Paris--", "title":"T41B-2900: Along-strike Deformation in Quaternary Valleys of Tropical NW Borneo: Implications for Active Tectonics, Seismicity and Geomorphology", "abstract":"In the wee hours of 5th June, 2015, NW Borneo was jolted by a 6.0 magnitude earthquake, caused by fault movement at a shallow depth of 10 km. The quake that originated from near the foot of the picturesque Mount Kinabalu, Sabah, was felt as far as 350 km away from the epicentre and has produced more than 90 aftershocks to date; ranging in magnitudes from 1.6 to 5.2. Although the geologically complex NW Borneo has experienced more than 60 mainshocks and numerous aftershocks since 1970 to present; research pertaining to active tectonics, morphotectonics analysis and subsequent geomorphic response to resulting transient dynamic topography remains inadequate.Here, we show evidences of active tectonics in tropical Sabah, NW Borneo, using morphometric indices, geomorphic indicators and report our results of morphotectonic analysis and consequent feedback of landscape and topography. Results from stream length gradient index, normalized channel steepness index and spatial distribution of hypsometric integral showed evidences of fault rejuvenation during Quaternary and recent periods. River longitudinal profiles showed the presence of several knickpoints indicating fault reactivations as the study area lacks lithological contrasts and similar climatic conditions along the channel reach. Field survey revealed the presence of highly elevated Quaternary fluvial terraces illustrating recent and important tectonic uplift rates in the trend of the exhumation rates calculated on Mt. Kinabalu by means of thermochronology. The uplifted terraces show a positive correlation with geomorphic analysis along the main valleys and other areas of active tectonics. Our analysis show the competition between important uplifts related to the dynamics of the NW Borneo Wedge and active normal faulting. These faults are in trend to the major earthquakes that occurred recently in this area, which have a normal faulting mechanism. The cause of the mechanism for recent tectonism and/or decoupling tectonics and the associated normal faulting are interpreted as a collapse in response to a post-slab break-off isostatic rebound during (10Myr to 4Myr) and after (1.9Myr to present) the collision. Finally, we propose a simplified tectonic model highlighting the predominant driving mechanism that initiated tectonic rejuvenation and seismicity.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86526", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86527" } }
{"authors":"Amity Andersen::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Patrick Reardon::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Stephany Chacon::Oregon State University--Nikolla Qafoku::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Nancy Washton::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Markus Kleber::Oregon State University--", "title":"B41F-0499: What can molecular dynamics simulations reveal about the stability of proteinaceous soil organic matter on mineral surfaces?", "abstract":"With the increased attention on climate change and the role of increasing atmospheric CO2 levels in global warming, the need for an accurate depiction of the carbon cycling processes involved in the Earth’s three major carbon pools, i.e., atmosphere, terrestrial systems, and oceans has never been greater. Within the terrestrial system, soil organic matter (SOM) represents an important carbon sub-pool. Complexation of SOM with mineral interfaces and particles is believed to protect SOM from possible biotic and abiotic transformation and mineralization to carbon dioxide. However, obtaining a molecular scale picture of the interactions of the various types of SOM with a variety of soil minerals is a challenging endeavor, especially for experimental techniques. Molecular scale simulations techniques can be applied to study the atomistic, molecular, and nanoscale aspects of SOM-mineral associations, and, therefore, and aid in filling current knowledge gaps in the potential fate and stability of SOM in soil systems. Here, we will discuss our recent results from large-scale molecular dynamics simulation of protein, GB1, and its interaction with clay and oxide/hydroxide minerals (i.e., kaolinite, Na+-MMT, Ca2+-MMT, goethite, and birnessite) including a comparison of structural changes of the protein by, protein orientation with respect to, degree of protein binding to, and mobility on the mineral surfaces. Our molecular simulations indicate that these mineral surfaces, with the exception of birnessite, potentially preserve the physical properties of the GB1 protein.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86527", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86528" } }
{"authors":"Rainer M Volkamer::University of Colorado at Boulder--Randall Chiu::University of Colorado at Boulder--Thomas Blumenstock::Karlsruhe Institute of Technology--Frank Hase::Karlsruhe Institute of Technology--James Hannigan::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Natalie Kille::University of Colorado at Boulder--Matthias Frey::Karlsruhe Institute of Technology--Mahesh Kumar Sha::Karlsruhe Institute of Technology--Johannes Orphal::Karlsruhe Institute of Technology--", "title":"A43F-0354: Separating methane emissions from biogenic sources and natural gas by vertical column enhancements of ammonia, ethane, and methane in the Colorado Front Range", "abstract":"Methane sources in the Colorado Front Range include biogenic sources from cattle feedlots and natural gas operations. Although numerous studies have measured methane emissions, there remains significant uncertainty regarding the relative contributions of these various methane emission sources. Here we present data from a March 2015 field campaign that deployed two Bruker EM27 Sun Fourier Transform Spectrometers (FTS) and the University of Colorado Solar Occultation Flux (CU-SOF) FTS in Eaton, Colorado; the former were used to measure enhancements in the methane vertical column densities (VCD), while the latter was used to measure ethane and ammonia VCDs. A third EM27 FTS was deployed to a background site in Westminster, Colorado which was far removed from cattle and petroleum operations. Northerly winds make possible the determination of methane VCD column enhancement from Westminster to Eaton. All instruments were compared during several background days at the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) in Boulder, Colorado. This presentation explores the potential of methane source attribution using ammonia as a tracer for feedlot emissions and ethane as a tracer for petroleum emissions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86528", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86529" } }
{"authors":"Michiko Shigefuji::Institute of Seismology and Volcanology, Hokkaido University--Nobuo Takai::Hokkaido University--Tsutomu Sasatani::Hokkaido University--Subeg Bijukchhen::Hokkaido University--Masayoshi Ichiyanagi::Institute of Seismology and Volcanology, Hokkaido University Hokkaido University--Sudhir Rajaure::Tribuvan University--Megh Dhital::Tribuvan University--", "title":"S43D-2837: Aftershock Records in the Kathmandu Valley of the 2015 Gorkha, Nepal, Earthquake", "abstract":"The devastating earthquake, named the Gorkha Earthquake, was followed by a series of aftershocks: more than 350 of them greater than M 4 and four aftershock greater than M 6. The rupture of main shock originating 80 km NW of capital Kathmandu propagated towards east. The ensuing aftershock activities are concentrated in the eastern part of the rupture area. The aftershock of Mw 6.6 occurred about half an hour later at epicentre near to that of the main shock. The other three large aftershocks however, were originated in the eastern extreme of the rupture zone. The aftershock of Mw 7.3 that occurred on 12th May 2015 brought about more damages to infrastructures already vulnerable due to the main shock. To understand the site effect of the Kathmandu valley structure, we installed continuous recording accelerometers in four different parts of the valley. Four stations were installed along a west-to-east profile of the valley at KTP (Kirtipur; hill top), TVU (Kirtipur; hill side), PTN (Patan) and THM (Thimi). The surface S-wave velocity of the KTP site was over 700 cm s-1, but for each of the other three sites it was less than 200 cm s-1. These velocities are consistent with the geological formations; KTP is above hard rock, and TVU, PTN and THM are over the lake sediment of the valley. It is normal for the amplitude of earthquake motion to be larger in areas lying above sedimentary soil than in areas above hard rock, and these motions can be amplified further by certain deep underground structures. To know deep underground structure using with aftershock records, we installed more four instruments in the Kathmandu basin after main shock. We analysed the strong-motion data of these five aftershocks recorded in the eight strong-motion accelerometers. The station of KTP is considered as reference site to compare the effect of sediments on the earthquake waves. The large aftershocks all have highest Peak Ground Velocity (PGV) at TVU and the station of KTP showed the least PGV as expected. The records at the sediment site are rich in long period waves. The spectral ratio of the sediment sites show significant amplification in the 0.2-1 Hz. For further work we will analyse the site effect of the Kathmandu basin by using these aftershocks and construct a 3-D velocity structure of the basin.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86529", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86532" } }
{"authors":"Caitlin Augustin::University of Miami--", "title":"H52F-02: Managing and understanding risk perception of surface leaks from CCS sites: risk assessment for emerging technologies and low-probability, high-consequence events", "abstract":"Carbon capture and storage (CCS) has been suggested by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change as a partial solution to the greenhouse gas emissions problem. As CCS has become mainstream, researchers have raised multiple risk assessment issues typical of emerging technologies. In our research, we examine issues occuring when stored carbon dioxide (CO2) migrates to the near-surface or surface. We believe that both the public misperception and the physical reality of potential environmental, health, and commercial impacts of leak events from such subsurface sites have prevented widespread adoption of CCS. This paper is presented in three parts; the first is an evaluation of the systemic risk of a CCS site CO2 leak and models indicating potential likelihood of a leakage event. As the likelihood of a CCS site leak is stochastic and nonlinear, we present several Bayesian simulations for leak events based on research done with other low-probability, high-consequence gaseous pollutant releases. Though we found a large, acute leak to be exceptionally rare, we demonstrate potential for a localized, chronic leak at a CCS site. To that end, we present the second piece of this paper. Using a combination of spatio-temporal models and reaction-path models, we demonstrate the interplay between leak migrations, material interactions, and atmospheric dispersion for leaks of various duration and volume. These leak-event scenarios have implications for human, environmental, and economic health; they also have a significant impact on implementation support. Public acceptance of CCS is essential for a national low-carbon future, and this is what we address in the final part of this paper. We demonstrate that CCS remains unknown to the general public in the United States. Despite its unknown state, we provide survey findings –analyzed in Slovic and Weber’s 2002 framework – that show a high unknown, high dread risk perception of leaks from a CCS site. Secondary findings are a conflation of CCS with the more advanced, widespread technology hydraulic fracturing and corresponding strong risk associations. We conclude with suggestions on how to integrate modeling results into public conversations to improve risk awareness and we provide preliminary policy recommendations to increase public support for CCS.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86532", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86534" } }
{"authors":"Masa-yuki Yamamoto::Kochi University of Technology--Shigeto Watanabe::Hokkaido University--Takumi Abe::Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency--Yoshihiro Kakinami::Kochi University of Technology--Hiroto Habu::Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency--Mamoru Yamamoto::Kyoto University--", "title":"SA23D-2364: Thermospheric neutral wind profile in moonlit midnight by Lithium release experiments in Japan", "abstract":"Neutral wind profiles were observed in lower thermosphere at about between 90 km and 130 km altitude by using resonance scattering light of moonlit Lithium (Li) vapor released from sounding rockets in midnight (with almost full-moon condition) in 2013 in Japan. As a target of the Daytime Dynamo campaign, Li release experiment was operated at Wallops Flight Facility (WFF) of NASA, U.S.A. in July, 2013 (Pfaff et al., 2015, this meeting), while the same kind of rocket-ground observation campaign in midnight was carried out by using S-520-27/S-310-42 sounding rockets in Uchinoura Space Center (USC) of JAXA, Kagoshima, Japan, also in July 2013. Since imaging signal-to-noise (S/N) condition of the experiment was so severe, we conducted to apply airborne observation for imaging the faint moonlit Li tracers so as to reduce the illuminating intensity of the background skies as an order of magnitude. Two independent methods for calculating the wind profile were applied to the Lithium emission image sequences successfully obtained by the airborne imaging by special Li imagers aboard the airplanes in order to derive precise information of Li tracers motion under the condition of single observation site on a moving aircraft along its flight path at about 12 km altitude in lower stratosphere. Slight attitude-feedback motion of the aircraft's 3-axes attitude changes (rolling, yawing and pitching) was considered for obtaining precise coordinates on each snapshot. Another approach is giving a simple mathematic function for wind profile to resolve the shape displacement of the imaged Li tracers. As a result, a wind profile in moonlit thermosphere was calculated in a range up to about 150 m/s with some fluctuated parts possibly disturbed by wind shears. In the same experiment, another sounding rocket S-310-42 with a TMA canister was also launched from USC/JAXA at about 1 hour before the rocket with carrying the Lithium canisters, thus, we can derive the other 2 profiles determined by the TMA chemical releases in up-leg and down-leg of the flight for the comparison. In this paper, we will report the obtained results of the moonlit Lithium emission intensities as well as method of wind profile calculations and final result of the comparison between the TMA and moonlit Lithium chemical releases in midnight lower thermosphere.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86534", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86535" } }
{"authors":"Tao Bai::Xi'an University of Technology--Wenting Jin::Xi'an University of Technology--", "title":"H33A-1570: Long Series Multi-objectives Optimal Operation of Water And Sediment Regulation", "abstract":"Secondary suspended river in Inner Mongolia reaches have formed and the security of reach and ecological health of the river are threatened. Therefore, researches on water-sediment regulation by cascade reservoirs are urgent and necessary. Under this emergency background, multi-objectives water and sediment regulation are studied in this paper. Firstly, multi-objective optimal operation models of Longyangxia and Liujiaxia cascade reservoirs are established. Secondly, based on constraints handling and feasible search space techniques, the Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm (NSGA-II) is greatly improved to solve the model. Thirdly, four different scenarios are set. It is demonstrated that: (1) scatter diagrams of perato front are obtained to show optimal solutions of power generation maximization, sediment maximization and the global equilibrium solutions between the two; (2) the potentiality of water-sediment regulation by Longyangxia and Liujiaxia cascade reservoirs are analyzed; (3) with the increasing water supply in future, conflict between water supply and water-sediment regulation occurred, and the sustainability of water and sediment regulation will confront with negative influences for decreasing transferable water in cascade reservoirs; (4) the transfer project has less benefit for water-sediment regulation. The research results have an important practical significance and application on water-sediment regulation by cascade reservoirs in the Upper Yellow River, to construct water and sediment control system in the whole Yellow River basin.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86535", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86536" } }
{"authors":"Gerard Olack::University of Chicago--Catherine Pfister::University of Chicago--J. Wootton::University of Chicago--Albert Colman::University of Chicago--", "title":"OS31A-1974: A Rapid and Portable DIC Analysis for Aquatic Systems: Rise of the Blanks.", "abstract":"Dissolved inorganic carbon analysis, in both fresh water and marine systems, can help determine carbon sources, sinks and flows through an ecosystem (Apongwa et al. 2013). Methods to measure DIC with small quantities in situ are becoming more important as the need for DIC estimation increases across aquatic ecosystems. Recently a number of papers have measured both δ13CVPDB and concentrations by injecting a relatively small amount of sample, e.g. 1 to 2 mL, into prepared sample tubes and then analyzing the headspace gas (Spötl 2004, Torres et al. 2005, Assayag et al. 2006). The initial sampling can be done in the field and samples are stable for weeks to months (Capasso et al. 2005, Taipale and Sonninen 2009) prior to analysis. However, CO2 gas samples can have a contaminant interfering with measurements when concentrations are low, e.g. 0.04% CO2 (Knohl et al. 2004), though the effect can be negligible at higher concentrations, e.g. 1% (Spötl 2005). We investigate fitting a blank correction to a suite of standards to quantify the contamination and more accurately measure the DIC concentration and isotopic values. We examined 6 and 18 month time points, using the suite of standards with δ13CVPDB of 18.69, -2.69 and -16.86 ‰, 2 to 3 mM concentration range. Fitting the blank correction allows us to detect the blank in the 6 month time point. The blank only has a minor effect on the -2.69 and -16.86 ‰ standards, <0.1 ‰, but a significant one for the 18.69 ‰ standard, ~0.4 ‰. Samples run ca. 2 mM in the range of 0 ‰ only see a blank effect in the range of 0.15 ‰, but samples run at < 1 mM show potential shifts of up to 0.8 ‰. The 18 month test showed the tubes are under vacuum—apparently the He diffuses thru the chlorobutyl rubber septa. Those samples can still be analyzed, either by charging them with He so they will not be under vacuum, or running as is and letting the vacuum in the tubes draw in air during the analysis. After correcting for the blank, we see a loss of CO2 from the vials, ca. 15%, and a shift in the per mil values. We show the DIC measurements can be robust over time, if a full suite of standards prepared with the sampling tubes are used for proper corrections.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86536", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86538" } }
{"authors":"Jonathan Normand::University of Southern California--Essam Heggy::University of Southern California--Mohamed Rouchdi::Institut agronomique et Vétérinaire Hassan II--Giovanni Scabbia::University of Southern California--Ali Al-Maktoumi::Sultan Qaboos University--Jean-Philippe Avouac::California Institute of Technology--", "title":"PP31A-2216: Evidence of buried paleodrainage in the Wahiba Sands, Oman: New perspective in understanding paleorecharge in the Southern Arabian Peninsula", "abstract":"The dynamic of the monsoon and position of its Intertropical Convergence Zone, as well as global sea level fluctuation are associated and have controlled the paleoclimate of the Wahiba Sands in Oman (Radies et al., 2004). Today the climate of the area is considered as hyper-arid but has also known wetter periods in the past, e.g. Early Holocene, and the paleodrainage mapped in the highland areas around the desert of Wahiba Sands by Robinson et al. 2007, using Radarsat-1 C-band SAR images, are supporting evidences of substantial surficial flows events. However, no drainage networks were detected under the Wahiba desert itself, which motivated our study to explore the area with a lower radar frequency to penetrate deeper into the desiccated dunes. Using ALOS PALSAR L-band radar SAR images, we observe NW-SE and NE-SW oriented paleochannels, under meters to few tens of meters of the linear dunes forming the Wahiba Sands area. The paleochannels are detectable with the loss of radar backscatter that we attribute to different sedimentary materials and their permittivity, porosity and scattering properties. To validate their detection, we perform a 500 MHz ground radar (GPR) survey in the interdunal area and observe them to be few tens of meters wide and about 1m deep. The scattering observed on the radargrams suggests these paleochannels to be filled with centimetric size gravels, which we believe cause the signal attenuation observed on the SAR images. Dunes are found to be highly favorable for the L-band penetration, with power loss of 0.2 dB/m derived from dielectric characterizations of field collected samples. The discovery of these buried paleochannels under the linear dunes brings new insights to construct the paleoclimatic evolution of the southern area of the Arabian peninsula and better understand the indeterminate tropical climate changes during the Late Pleistocene and Holocene.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86538", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86539" } }
{"authors":"Bettina Martinez-Hackert::Organization Not Listed--Jorge Bajo::SUNY Buffalo--Demetrio Escobar::MARN- DGOA--Eduardo Gutierrez::MARN- DGOA--", "title":"V23A-3087: Chaparrastique (San Mighel) Volcano Eruptions since Dec. 29th, 2013, El Salvador", "abstract":"The December 29th, 2013 eruption of Chaparrastique (San Miguel) volcano in El Salvador came as a surprise and was the first of several small eruptions in the past two years. They came after many years of preceeding earthquake swarms and significant degassing. Being the second volcano to erupt in El Salvador in less than ten years, it caused grave concern for the population of the country. Although they were not large eruptions (VEI 2), the materials were widespread and caused deposits of volcanic tephra as far at the capital San Salvador and closed the airports in the vecinity for a couple of days. This is a summary of the research, mitigation and services that were done days after the first eruption on December 29, 2013 and the follwing months. In conjunction with the team of the Direccion General del Observatorio Ambiental from the Ministerio de Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales possible first response strategies were discussed and decided to obtain results that could be quickly put in place to mitigate and decide on actions such as evacuations or relocations of people living in volcano related high-risk hazard areas. Collection of samples, mapping and measurements of the volcanic tephra in the field together with Digital Globe and areal photography after the event, allowed identification of four different volcanic products that can be correlated to the opening of the vent and ending in the eruption of juvenile materials of basaltic to trachybasaltic composition, and the production of a lahar hazard map based on LaharZ.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86539", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86540" } }
{"authors":"Tanya Gallagher::Forest Sciences Centre--Sarah Gergel::University of British Columbia--", "title":"H11F-1416: The Transboundary Aquifer Management Challenge: Linking Landscape Patterns and Groundwater Nitrate Concentrations in the Abbotsford-Sumas Aquifer, USA/Canada", "abstract":"Changes in land use and landscape pattern can have an array of impacts on aquatic systems, including impacts which span international waters and borders. Globally, agricultural land use patterns and practices are among the factors responsible for elevated nitrate concentrations in groundwater aquifers. Coordination of landscape monitoring across trans-boundary aquifers is needed to monitor and address contamination issues as landscape patterns can vary widely among different political jurisdictions. Landscape indicators, which quantify the amount and arrangement of land cover (such as proportion and abundance of land cover types), are one such way to improve our understanding of cross-border aquatic system interactions. In Western North America, the Abbotsford-Sumas Aquifer (ASA) spans the US-Canada border and provides drinking water for over 100,000 people. Intensive agriculture combined with high precipitation and well-drained soils make this aquifer susceptible to nitrate leaching. To understand how landscape patterns influence nitrate concentrations, we ask: Which landscape indicators correlate most strongly with elevated nitrate concentrations? A seamless cross-border land cover mosaic was created by harmonizing a variety of US and Canadian geodata. Auxiliary high spatial resolution imagery (e.g., 5m RapidEye and historical Google Earth) were used to quantify fine-scale landscape features (such as number of farm field renovations) with suspected mechanistic links to nitrate sources. We examined groundwater nitrate concentrations in shallow wells (screens < 10 m below the water table) using data collected by the Washington State Department of Ecology and Environment Canada. Surrounding each well, terrestrial zones of influence (aligned with the directional flow of groundwater) were delineated within which landscape patterns were characterized. Multiple regression was used to compare the strength of relationships between land use practices and nitrate concentrations. Preliminary results show strong positive correlations between area of raspberry renovations and mean nitrate concentrations. This work represents a first important step in the development of a suite of transparent and affordable monitoring approaches for trans-border water resources.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86540", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86541" } }
{"authors":"Kyotaek Hwang::Syracuse University--David Chandler::Syracuse University--", "title":"H11E-1384: Characterization of hydrogeomorphology of the natural and restored wetlands in St. Lawrence River Valley, NY", "abstract":"Understanding of local hydrology and landscape setting is essential for evaluating systematic functions and services of the wetlands because the ecosystem components are sensitive to hydrodynamics and topography, particularly in vegetation composition and abundance. Wetland hydrogeomorphology provides a general sense of the wetland structure such as plant community and hydroperiod, but it can be easily altered by human activity and disturbance. In order to achieve a successful wetland restoration on the altered landscape and topography, recovery of hydrology for adaptation should be prioritized. In this study, regional hydrogeomorphic classification of 18 natural and 48 restored wetlands in the St. Lawrence River Valley area in the northern New York State was conducted and wetland-upland interactions were investigated using pairs of water level measurements at a groundwater well and standing water in randomly selected 5 natural and 17 restored wetlands. The wetlands over large area were broadly classified in terms of geomorphic setting, water source, and hydrodynamics. Water level was monitored on an hourly basis for an entire Water Year of 2015 to understand a hydroperiod and hydrodynamics at each site. Horizontal hydraulic gradient from upland groundwater to standing water in the wetlands was also calculated from the observation data to estimate groundwater contribution as an input source of the wetlands. The characterized hydrology was categorized into the regional hydrogeomorphic classes and further statistically analyzed. The regional wetland classification and functional assessment will provide useful tools to make a proper restoration plan.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86541", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86542" } }
{"authors":"Andrew Lin::NCU National Central University of Taiwan--Char-Shine Liu::IONTU Institute of Oceanography National Taiwan University--Feisal Dirgantara::NCU National Central University of Taiwan--", "title":"T43A-2961: Splay Faults and Associated Mass Transport Deposits in the Manila Accretionary Wedge near Taiwan: Implications for Geohazards", "abstract":"Plate interface megathrusts are major seismogenic faults in subduction zone, capable of generating great earthquakes with widespread submarine landslides and damaging tsunami. Upward branching of megathrusts results in splay faults in the accretionary wedge. Reflection seismic data across the accretionary wedge off southern Taiwan, reveal at least two strands of splay faults as well as multiple stacked mass transport deposits (MTDs) nearby the faults. With the help of sediment coring and age datings in the vicinity of the splay fault, implications for temporal evolution of the mass wasting processes and episodic activities of splay faults are discussed in this paper. Seismic data show two branches of arcward and gently-dipping splay faults with two slope basins lying in the footwall and hangingwall of the faults, respectively. The older and buried splay fault is inactive as the fault tip is covered by up to 1000 m thick sediments in the footwall slope basin, indicating that it ceased to be active around 0.5 Ma ago. Repeated slip of this fault prior to ~0.5 Ma ago may also result in 4 stacked and multiple mass transport deposits (MTDs) of up to 700-m thick found in vicinity of this fault. This fossil splay fault is characterized by reflection polarity similar to that of seafloor, indicative of low water saturation along the fault zone and hence not an active fluid conduit. The younger and overlying splay fault cuts through the seafloor and the emergent fault tip lying at the toe of steep slope (~ 15 degree) with significant slope break. There is also a 500-m horizontal offset, between the buried paleo-seafloor in the footwall and the present-day seafloor on the hangingwall. The reflection polarity of this fault zone is reversed to that of seafloor, indicating fluid rich for this fault patch. These lines of evidence suggest that this young splay fault is an active fault with active fluid circulation along the fault. Our results indicate that the old splay fault ceased to be active around 0.5 Ma ago and multiple stacked MTDs found nearby the fault are mostly likely caused by the faulting events of this fault. A new and most likely active splay fault has developed recently and this new fault is a branch of plate-interface megathrust capable of generating great earthquakes and ensuing damaging tsunami.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86542", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86543" } }
{"authors":"Anant Marur::Lockheed Martin Solar and Astrophysics Laboratory--", "title":"ED41A-0856: Fourier analysis of Solar atmospheric numerical simulations accelerated with GPUs (CUDA).", "abstract":"Solar dynamics from the convection zone creates a variety of waves that may propagate through the solar atmosphere. These waves are important in facilitating the energy transfer between the sun’s surface and the corona as well as propagating energy throughout the solar system. How and where these waves are dissipated remains an open question. Advanced 3D numerical simulations have furthered our understanding of the processes involved. Fourier transforms to understand the nature of the waves by finding the frequency and wavelength of these waves through the simulated atmosphere, as well as the nature of their propagation and where they get dissipated. In order to analyze the different waves produced by the aforementioned simulations and models, Fast Fourier Transform algorithms will be applied. Since the processing of the multitude of different layers of the simulations (of the order of several 100^3 grid points) would be time intensive and inefficient on a CPU, CUDA, a computing architecture that harnesses the power of the GPU, will be used to accelerate the calculations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86543", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86544" } }
{"authors":"Regina Carns::University of Washington Seattle Campus--Bonnie Light::Applied Physics Laboratory University of Washington--", "title":"C23B-0786: Modeled Effects of Encapsulated Crude Oil on Light Transmission Through Sea Ice", "abstract":"As part of ongoing research to further advance a range of oil spill response technologies in the Arctic, nine oil and gas companies established the Arctic Oil Spill Response Technology Joint Industry Programme (JIP) in 2012. One research theme is designed to expand the industry's remote-sensing and monitoring capabilities. A suite of sensors was tested on a saltwater ice sheet grown in the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory (CRREL) Ice Engineering Research Facility test basin while oil was injected under the ice at different points in the ice growth. The ice continued to grow after the oil injection, allowing the oil to become encapsulated so testing could occur with various thicknesses of ice below the oil. Measurements of apparent optical properties were taken before and after the injection of oil and during various stages of ice growth. We have used a Monte Carlo model of radiative transfer for sea ice [Light et al., 2003] to explore light transmission through sea ice containing encapsulated oil. This model uses a cylindrical domain, making it well-suited for determining how large a pool of oil encapsulated in a given thickness of ice must be before it is detectable from beneath the ice cover. We use this model in combination with the optical observations to predict the amount of light transmitted and reflected from sea ice of various thicknesses containing oil. We also examine the effects of a scattering layer on the ice surface, as would commonly be present in the Arctic, either in the form of snow or the surface scattering layer that develops on melting ice. We evaluate the feasibility of distinguishing between different types of oil based on the spectral signature of light transmitted through the ice. Further model sensitivity studies yield insight about the effects of the distribution of the oil within the ice cover. Light, B., G. A. Maykut, and T. C. Grenfell (2003), A two-dimensional Monte Carlo model of radiative transfer in sea ice, J. Geophys. Res., 108(C7), 1–18, doi:10.1029/2002JC001513.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86544", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86545" } }
{"authors":"Kyle Fredrick::California University of Pennsylvania--", "title":"H31D-1448: Long-term changes to flood conditions due to varying management strategies, Rock River, WI", "abstract":"The Rock River is a 300-mile tributary of the Mississippi River in southern Wisconsin. Its source is a protected migratory bird habitat called the Horicon National Wildlife Refuge. Below the refuge, the Rock River flows through mostly rural, agricultural areas, with wide floodplain of mixed land use. Between the dam at Horicon and a hydroelectric dam in Watertown, WI, lie the townships of Lebanon, Ashippun, and Ixonia. These rural townships boast productive agricultural lands of mostly corn, soybeans, and alfalfa. Large portions of their land are within the floodplain, underlain by vast expanses of outwash sands and gravels, glaciolacustrine deposits, and tills. Throughout the region, spring floods are common from snowmelt and spring rain. These annual floods may be exacerbated by frozen ground and slow infiltration, making it an accepted part of life for residents. Over the last 8 years, and possibly as many as 20, this segment of the Rock River has seen an increase in flooding both in periodicity and retention of flood waters. Due to the delicate habitat of the wildlife refuge and the commissioned hydroelectric installation at the upper dam in Watertown, the residents and local governments of the Lebanon/Ashippun/Ixonia segment of the river have mostly been left to their own devices to monitor and manage flood events. Lebanon Township has been recording water levels for several years. Recent events at the hydroelectric plant seem to indicate that it may be playing a more important role in the flooding. High water events and flood retention do not correlate well with precipitation for the region. It appears that releases at the dam, or periods of water retention, are driving the long flooding periods upstream. Negative impacts to the region from the flooding include property damage, loss of arable land, and environmental effects.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86545", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86547" } }
{"authors":"Vincent Wickwar::Utah State University--", "title":"SA52A-01: Temperature Results from the High-Power, Large-Aperture, Rayleigh-Scatter Lidar at Utah State University", "abstract":"The high-power, large-aperture, Rayleigh-Scatter Lidar at the Atmospheric Lidar Observatory at Utah State University (ALO-USU) has been significantly upgraded over the last few years. With almost 5 square meters of collecting area and 42 W of power at 532 nm, and a 30 Hz repetition rate, it has already probed the lower thermosphere up to 115 km. The intent is to reach 120 km on a regular basis. This much higher altitude limit for Rayleigh observations gives rise to challenges from changing neutral composition and for choosing an initial temperature. With one detector channel, the low-altitude limit is 70 km. The intent is to add a second detector channel to lower the low-altitude limit to 45 km. This will enable continuous observations of relative density and absolute temperature throughout the mesosphere and well into the lower thermosphere. This lower low-altitude limit also enables the new data to be combined with the existing 11-year, 45-to-90 km, mesospheric data set that began in 1993. By starting at 45 km, the Rayleigh lidar data can, furthermore, be combined with reanalysis models having upper altitude limits above 45 km, which will then give neutral densities and temperatures from 0 to 120 km.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86547", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86548" } }
{"authors":"Roberto Paoli::Argonne National Laboratory--", "title":"A13D-0367: Spatial large-eddy simulations of contrail formation in the wake of an airliner", "abstract":"Contrails and contrail-cirrus are the most uncertain contributors to aviation radiative forcing. In order to reduce this uncertainty one needs to gain more knowledge on the physicochemical processes occurring in the aircraft plume, which eventually lead to the transformation of contrails into cirrus. To that end, the accurate prediction of the number of activated particles and their spatial and size distributions at the end of the jet regime may be helpful to initialize simulations in the following vortex regime. We present the results from spatial large-eddy simulations (LES) of contrail formation in the near-field wake of a generic (but full-scale) airliner that is representative of those used in long-haul flights in current fleets. The flow around the aircraft has been computed using a RANS code taking into account the full geometry that include the engines and the aerodynamic set-up for cruise conditions. The data have been reconstructed at a plane closely behind the trailing edge of the wing and used as inflow boundary conditions for the LES. We employ fully compressible 3D LES coupled to Lagrangian microphysical module that tracks parcels of ice particles individually. The ice microphysical model is simple yet it contains the basic thermodynamic ingredients to model soot activation and water vapor deposition. Compared to one-dimensional models or even RANS, LES allow for more accurate predictions of the mixing between exhaust and ambient air. Hence, the number of activated particles and the ice growth rate can be also determined with higher accuracy. This is particularly crucial for particles located at the edge of the jet that experience large gradients of temperature and humidity. The results of the fully coupled LES (where the gas phase and the particles are solved together) are compared to offline simulations where the ice microphysics model is run using thermodynamic data from pre-calculated particle trajectories extracted from inert LES (where ice microphysics has been switched off).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86548", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86549" } }
{"authors":"Stephen Farrington::Transcend Engineering--Tana Wood::Usda Forest Service C/o Gisel--Molly Cavaleri::Michigan Tech--Sasha Reed::Southwest Biological Science Center Moab--Bruce Kimball::USDA ARS--Aura Alonso-Rodríguez::Michigan Tech--Emmanuelle Farrington::Transcend Engineering--", "title":"H53E-1710: Field Evaluation of a New Sensor for Near-Surface Critical Zone Soil Moisture in Continuous Spatial Profile", "abstract":"A new sensor technology, the Profile Resolving In-situ Soil Moisture Sensor (PRISMS), offers the potential to advance understanding of coupled biogeochemical and hydrologic processes in the near subsurface critical zone by acquiring continuous vertical profiles of near surface soil moisture. We present results of comparing PRISMS acquired soil moisture data to data from arrays of conventional TDR soil moisture probes installed at the Tropical Responses to Altered Climate Experiment (TRACE) site in Luquillo, Puerto Rico. Tropical forests exchange more carbon dioxide with the atmosphere than any other biome on Earth. In the next 20 years, the tropics will experience unprecedented warming, yet there is exceedingly high uncertainty about their potential responses to this imminent climatic change. TRACE is being conducted to help elucidate how tropical forests will respond to increasing temperatures, by examining critical processes in the most biogeochemically active ecosystem components of tropical forests (i.e., leaves, roots, soil microbes). These processes are coupled to subsurface hydrology which PRISMS monitors by providing continuous spatial profiles of soil moisture content. Six PRISMS probes were installed in and around two experimental plots in the TRACE, alongside vertical arrays of conventional TDR soil moisture probes that perform discrete volume averaged measurements. Data are being collected to validate the performance of the new technology. Preliminary results from the continuously profiling 1-meter long PRISMS probes will be presented in comparison to spatially discrete measurements obtained using the conventional probes. Also presented will be a review of the installation procedures used and integration of the new sensors into the TRACE sensor network.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86549", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86550" } }
{"authors":"Zaher Hashisho::University of Alberta--Hebaalah Marey::University of Alberta--Long Fu::AEMERA--John Gille::NCAR--", "title":"A51N-0281: AEROSOL CHARACTERISITICS OVER ALBERTA USING MODIS AND OMI SATELLITE DATA", "abstract":"We present the first detailed analysis of optical aerosol characterization over Alberta based on satellite data analysis. Aerosol optical depth (AOD) at 550 nm for 11 years (2003–2013), derived from the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) sensor onboard NASA's Aqua satellite, was analyzed. Additionally, UV aerosol index (AI) data for 9 years (2005-2013) retrieved from the Ozone Monitoring Instrument (OMI) onboard NASA's Aura satellite was used to examine absorbing aerosols. Comparing AERONET to MODIS 3 km and 10 km products indicated a stronger correlation (r=0.9 for the latter vs 0.7 for the former) thus 10 km product has been utilized for this study. Overall, gridded seasonal maps (0.1 deg.) of the 11 yr averaged AOD illustrate the highest AOD during summer, followed by spring, with the lowest observed values during fall (there is no enough valid MODIS data in winter due to cloud cover). Aerosol optical properties exhibited large spatio-temporal heterogeneity in the summer with mean AOD of 0.25, followed by spring, while the fall had less variability with mean AOD below 0.1 for the entire region. However, the spatial analysis indicated hot spots around Edmonton and Calgary cities even in the fall when AODs are very low (close to background). All of the datasets showed interannual variability with no significant trend. The AI values ranged from 0.5 during winter to as high as 5 during summer suggesting mid- and long range transport of boreal fire emissions. Map correlation between AOD and UV AI showed large variability (0.2 to 0.7) indicating presence of different types of aerosols. These low correlations imply the presence of non-absorbing particles (e.g. sulfate) that comprise a relatively large mass fraction of AOD and/or low altitude particles.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86550", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86551" } }
{"authors":"Chelsea Morris::Cornell University--Michael Walter::Cornell University--Emily Reiss::Cornell University--", "title":"B34A-03: Winter Cover Crops and Nitrous Oxide Emissions in Early Spring", "abstract":"Winter cover crops mixtures can be used to manage greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions during critical periods such as spring thaw. Legumes are added to cover crops mixtures to increase crop productivity, but it is unknown if this effect decreases N2O emissions. In this project we investigate the relationship between biodiversity, productivity and GHG fluxes in cover crops varieties typically grown for soil heath in agricultural systems. Surface GHG emissions were measured with closed chambers beginning during snowmelt events and continuing until crops were tilled into the soil in early summer. We found that nitrous oxide emissions were reduced in cover cropped plots during the early spring thaw period when compared to bare soil. GHG emission reductions in agriculture can be achieved with proper selection of winter hardy cover crops.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86551", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86552" } }
{"authors":"James Kirchner::ETH Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich WSL Swiss Federal Institute for Forest, Snow and Landscape Research--Scott Jasechko::University of Calgary--", "title":"H21F-1432: Tracer Cycles and Water Ages in Heterogeneous Catchments and Aquifers", "abstract":"Estimates of catchment mean transit times are often based on seasonal cycles of stable isotope tracers in precipitation and streamflow. In many cases these transit time estimates are derived directly from sine-wave fitting to the observed seasonal isotope cycles. Broadly similar results are also obtained from time-domain convolutions or explicit tracer modeling, because here too the dominant tracer signal that these techniques seek to match is the seasonal isotopic cycle. Here I use simple benchmark tests to show that estimates of mean transit times based on seasonal tracer cycles will typically be wrong by several hundred percent, when applied to catchments with realistic degrees of spatial heterogeneity. This aggregation bias arises from the strong nonlinearity in the relationship between tracer cycle amplitude and mean travel time. A similar bias arises in estimates of mean transit times in nonstationary catchments. Since typical real-world catchments are both spatially heterogeneous and nonstationary, this analysis poses a fundamental challenge to tracer-based estimates of mean transit times. I propose an alternative storage metric, the fraction of ` young water`  in streamflow, defined as the fraction of runoff with transit times of less than roughly 0.2 years. I show that young water fractions are virtually free of aggregation bias; that is, they can be accurately estimated from tracer cycles in highly heterogeneous mixtures of subcatchments with strongly contrasting transit time distributions. They can also be reliably estimated in strongly nonstationary catchments. Young water fractions can be estimated separately for individual flow regimes, allowing direct determination of how shifts in hydraulic regime alter the fraction of water reaching the stream by fast flowpaths. One can also estimate the chemical composition of idealized ` young water`  and ` old water`  end-members, using relationships between young water fractions and solute concentrations across different flow regimes. These results demonstrate that mean transit times cannot be estimated reliably from seasonal tracer cycles, and that, by contrast, the young water fraction is a robust and useful metric of transit times, even in catchments that exhibit strong nonstationarity and heterogeneity.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86552", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86553" } }
{"authors":"David Fulker::OPeNDAP, Inc.--", "title":"IN13A-1811: Layering Principles from One Approach to Isentropic Analysis and Modeling of the Atmosphere", "abstract":"Meteorologists often treat potential temperature (theta)—the temperature a parcel would have if moved adiabatically to the surface—as a vertical coordinate. The resulting layers (isentropes) are lagrangian-like. Bosart, in a 2002 tribute to Reed, writes “PV as a tracer [along isentropes] enabled Reed, Danielson … to adopt a Lagrangian perspective in studies of cyclogenesis and upper-level frontogenesis.” Bosart also mentions Shapiro’s work on clear-air turbulence and Bleck’s modeling: “Bleck ... simulated cyclogenesis using a simple model [on] surfaces of constant potential temperature.” From the author’s work helping Bleck and Shapiro with isentropic analysis and modeling, the following principles are offered as potentially useful in defining reusable, consistent data layers across space and time in multiple domains. Monotonicity— Layers reflect transformed coordinates, mappable to/from elevation, hence strictly monotonic across the geographic domain. I.e., layers cannot intersect. Bleck devised an invertible algorithm mapping pressure along soundings to a coordinate resembling potential temperature (departing only to maintain monotonicity). A collection of these (at one observing time) is a sampled representation of the transform between (lat, lon, elev) and (lat, lon, theta). Suggested principle: Data layers possess, for a geographic sample set, invertible algorithms to map between elevation and a monotonic transform coordinate. Intralayer Interpolation — The transformed coordinate may need evaluation at points not in the sample set. The Bleck/Shapiro work showed how easily monotonicity is violated when gridding sample data. This problem was solved via another transform: interpolation on the log of layer differences (i.e., thickness). Suggested principle: Data layers possess a monotonicity-preserving algorithm to interpolate coordinate values to geographic points not in the sample set. Representation— The Bleck/Shapiro work entailed no data sharing, so this suggestion is speculative. Suggested principle: Layers are 2-D only superficially, so the OGC standard for representing them may be Web Coverage Service (WCS over netCDF). WCS embraces features as well as coverages and can represent higher dimensions. A WCS profile specific to layers may be required for true reusability.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86553", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86554" } }
{"authors":"Eric Wilkman::San Diego State University--Walter Oechel::San Diego State University--Donatella Zona::San Diego State University--", "title":"B31D-0619: Plot-level Microtopographical Controls on Arctic Growing Season and Fall Shoulder Season Soil CO2 Flux", "abstract":"Permafrost soils are among the most obvious environments in which current constraints on decomposition are likely to change as a result of climatic alterations, potentially exposing large amounts of previously stored carbon (C) to microbial degradation and emission during the next few decades (Davidson & Janssens, 2006). As a best estimate, the soils of the circumpolar Arctic store over 1,035 ± 150 Pg C in the near surface (0–3 m), approximately twice the amount of C that is currently in the atmosphere (Tarnocai et al., 2009; Hugelius et al., 2014). Currently, however, much of this previously stored carbon is at risk of loss to the atmosphere due to accelerated soil organic matter decomposition in warmer future climates (Dorrepaal et al., 2009; Schuur et al., 2015). Polygonization, a predominant cryogenic process, produces micro-topographical and hydrological heterogeneity, as polygon rims produce lower water tables and drier conditions and low polygon centers produce higher water tables and wetter conditions (Brown et al., 1980). As climate models increasingly suggest that current warming trends in the Arctic (4–8 °C higher annual surface air temperatures) will continue by century’s end, C cycling in these northern climes may be further amplified (IPCC, 2013). Much uncertainty remains in regard to the spatial and temporal extent of CO2 emissions from these systems, especially in view of the potential for modifications to C cycling in response to increased warming and deeper summer thawing of the active soil layer (Mastepanov et al., 2013). Therefore, an LI-8100 Automated Soil Flux System (LI-COR Biosciences) was deployed in Barrow, AK, to gather high temporal frequency soil CO2 fluxes from a wet sedge tundra ecosystem. Dark chamber fluxes were gathered from 5 microtopographical habitats (designated flat, high, low, polygon rim, and polygon troughs) to calculate daily average, diurnal, and monthly respiratory fluxes. With the addition of concurrently gathered environmental parameters (thaw depth, water table, soil temperature, and eddy covariance meteorological tower data), the relatively high temporal and microspatial extent of this dataset will allow us to better understand the controls of microtopography and water table height on C cycling in this ecosystem.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86554", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86555" } }
{"authors":"Jida Wang::Kansas State University--Yongwei Sheng::University of California Los Angeles--Chunqiao Song::University of California Los Angeles--Takuto Urano::Kansas State University--Pedro Satori::Universidade Federal de Lavras--Spencer Ford::Kansas State University--", "title":"H41F-1406: A High-Resolution Global Lake Inventory with Classified Freshwater and Saline Types", "abstract":"Lakes are the largest surface water stock readily accessible to human need. Monitoring and understanding the distribution, change, and vulnerability of contemporary lakes remain as one of the top priorities in hydrological studies. Our recent project supported by the U.S. Geological Survey produced a high-resolution inventory of global lake extents (greater than 0.4 hectare) using circa 2000 Landsat TM and ETM+ imagery, which further enhanced human’s vision on the precise physical distribution of contemporary surface water stock worldwide. Continuous advancement in understanding regional-to-global surface water stress demands expanded knowledge on not only water discharge in streams and rivers but also stock in freshwater lakes. Yet to our best knowledge, we are currently lacking detailed, reliable inventory of lake water types on a global scale. Here we represent a progressing world lake database with differentiated freshwater and saline categories by integrating hydrological analysis, climate data, and spectral remote sensing. This effort is a natural extension of our global lake mapping project and a prerequisite of our overarching goal to assess global lake vulnerability. The completed lake data will also benefit a wide spectrum of scientific disciplines and water resources management agencies.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86555", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86556" } }
{"authors":"Craig Schiffries::Carnegie Institution of Wash.--", "title":"PA43B-2189: Translational Geoscience: Converting Geoscience Innovation into Societal Impacts", "abstract":"Translational geoscience — which involves the conversion of geoscience discovery into societal, economic, and environmental impacts — has significant potential to generate large benefits but has received little systematic attention or resources. In contrast, translational medicine — which focuses on the conversion of scientific discovery into health improvement — has grown enormously in the past decade and provides useful models for other fields. Elias Zerhouni [1] developed a “new vision” for translational science to “ensure that extraordinary scientific advances of the past decade will be rapidly captured, translated, and disseminated for the benefit of all Americans.” According to Francis Collins, “Opportunities to advance the discipline of translational science have never been better. We must move forward now. Science and society cannot afford to do otherwise.” On 9 July 2015, the White House issued a memorandum directing U.S. federal agencies to focus on translating research into broader impacts, including commercial products and decision-making frameworks [3]. Natural hazards mitigation is one of many geoscience topics that would benefit from advances in translational science. This paper demonstrates that natural hazards mitigation can benefit from advances in translational science that address such topics as improving emergency preparedness, communicating life-saving information to government officials and citizens, explaining false positives and false negatives, working with multiple stakeholders and organizations across all sectors of the economy and all levels of government, and collaborating across a broad range of disciplines. [1] Zerhouni, EA (2005) New England Journal of Medicine 353(15):1621–1623. [2] Collins, FS (2011) Science Translational Medicine 3(90):1–6. [3] Donovan, S and Holdren, JP (2015) Multi-agency science and technology priorities for the FY 2017 budget. Executive Office of the President of the United States, 5 pp.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86556", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86557" } }
{"authors":"Matthew Letts::University of Lethbridge--Elizabeth Millions::University of Lethbridge--Theo Harvey::University of Lethbridge--Stewart Rood::University of Lethbridge--", "title":"GC33B-1289: Physiological and morphological responses of pine and willow saplings to post-fire salvage logging", "abstract":"With global warming, forest fires may be increasing in frequency, and post-fire salvage logging may become more common. The ecophysiological impacts of this practice on tree saplings remain poorly understood. In this study, we examined the physiological and morphological impacts of increased light intensity, due to post-fire salvage logging, on the conifer Pinus contorta (pine) and deciduous broadleaf Salix lucida (willow) tree and shrub species in the Crowsnest Pass region of southern Alberta. Photosynthetic gas-exchange and plant morphological measurements were taken throughout the summer of 2013 on approximately ten year-old saplings of both species. Neither species exhibited photoinhibition, but different strategies were observed to acclimate to increased light availability. Willow saplings were able to slightly elevate their light-saturated rate of net photosynthesis (Amax) when exposed to higher photosynthetic photon flux density (PPFD), thus increasing their growth rate. Willow also exhibited increased leaf inclination angles and leaf mass per unit area (LMA), to decrease light interception in the salvage-logged plot. By contrast, pine, which exhibited lower Amax and transpiration (E), but higher water-use efficiency (WUE = Amax/E) than willow, increased the rate at which electrons were moved through and away from the photosynthetic apparatus in order to avoid photoinhibition. Acclimation indices were higher in willow saplings, consistent with the hypothesis that species with short-lived foliage exhibit greater acclimation. LMA was higher in pine saplings growing in the logged plot, but whole-plant and branch-level morphological acclimation was limited and more consistent with a response to decreased competition in the logged plot, which had much lower stand density.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86557", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86558" } }
{"authors":"Anthony Longjas::St. Anthony Falls Laboratory--Kimberly Hill::University of Minnesota--", "title":"EP21A-0890: Bed Stability and Debris Flow Erosion: A Dynamic “Shields Criterion” Associated with Bed Structure", "abstract":"Debris flows are mass movements that play an important role in transporting sediment from steep uplands to rivers at lower slopes. As the debris flow moves downstream, it entrains materials such as loose boulders, gravel, sand and mud deposited locally by shorter flows such as slides and rockfalls. To capture the conditions under which debris flows entrain bed sediment, some models use something akin to the Shields’ criterion and an excess shear stress of the flow. However, these models typically neglect granular-scale effects in the bed which can modify the conditions under which a debris flow is erosional or depositional. For example, it is well known that repeated shearing causes denser packing in loose dry soils, which undoubtedly changes their resistance to shear. Here, we present laboratory flume experiments showing that the conditions for entrainment by debris flows is significantly dependent on the aging of an erodible bed even for narrowly distributed spherical particles. We investigate this quantitatively using particle tracking measurements to quantify instantaneous erosion rates and the evolving bed structure or “fabric”. With progressive experiments we find a signature that emerges in the bed fabric that is correlated with an increasing apparent “fragility” of the bed. Specifically, a system that is originally depositional may become erosional after repeated debris flow events, and an erodible bed becomes increasingly erodible with repeated flows. We hypothesize that related effects of bed aging at the field scale may be partly responsible for the increasing destructiveness of secondary flows of landslides and debris flows.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86558", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86559" } }
{"authors":"Mohamed Saber::Assistant Professor--Ahmed Sefelnasr::Associate Professor--Koray Yilmaz::Assistant Professor--", "title":"H51E-1424: Flash Floods Simulation Using a Physical based hydrological Model at the Eastern Nile Basin: Case studies; Wadi Assiut, Egypt and Wadi Gumara, Lake Tana, Ethiopia.", "abstract":"Flash flood is a natural hydrological phenomenon which affects many regions of the world. The behavior and effect of this phenomenon is different from one region to the other regions depending on several issues such as climatology and hydrological and topographical conditions at the target regions. Wadi assiut, Egypt as arid environment, and Gumara catchment, Lake Tana, Ethiopia, as humid conditions have been selected for application. The main target of this work is to simulate flash floods at both catchments considering the difference between them on the flash flood behaviors based on the variability of both of them. In order to simulate the flash floods, remote sensing data and a physical-based distributed hydrological model, Hydro-BEAM-WaS (Hydrological River Basin Environmental Assessment Model incorporating Wadi System) have been integrated used in this work. Based on the simulation results of flash floods in these regions, it was found that the time to reach the maximum peak is very short and consequently the warning time is very short as well. It was found that the flash floods starts from zero flow in arid environment, but on the contrary in humid arid, it starts from Base flow which is changeable based on the simulated events. Distribution maps of flash floods showing the vulnerable regions of these selected areas have been developed. Consequently, some mitigation strategies relying on this study have been introduced. The proposed methodology can be applied effectively for flash flood forecasting at different climate regions, however the paucity of observational data.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86559", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86560" } }
{"authors":"Kyle Michelson::University of Texas at Austin--Robert Sanford::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Albert Valocchi::Univ Illinois--Charles Werth::University of Texas at Austin--", "title":"B21C-0469: The physical limits of metal reduction by long-range extracellular electron transfer, and the role of cytochrome-bound flavins", "abstract":"Microbial reduction of metals and radionuclides in the subsurface plays an essential role in the biogeochemical cycling of micronutrients and the remediation of contaminated groundwater. While recent advances in the field have improved our ability to understand and predict bioreduction in these environments, the contribution of long-range extracellular electron transfer (EET) by electron shuttling or reduction along conductive pili remains elusive. Long-range EET is implicated in the reduction of radionuclides like uranium that are reversibly sorbed in clay nanopores and exist as persistant sources of contamination. In regions of low hydraulic conductivity, electron shuttles and conductive pili may increase physical mixing beyond what is possible by advection and diffusion, resulting in reduction over a larger area than predicted by current models. We present a novel microfluidic platform that allows us to study long-range EET to the exclusion of other mechanisms, directly observe these phenomena under a controlled environment representative of groundwater conditions, monitor the metabolic activity and redox state of bacteria, and determine the presence of reduced products in-situ. Using Geobacter sulfurreducens as a model metal-reducing bacteria, insoluble manganese dioxide as an electron acceptor, and Escherichia coli K-12 as a reductant and redox buffer, we demonstate that 1) long-range EET by conductive pili requires the presence of flavins 2) Reduction by direct contact only requires the presence of a lowered electric potential 3) The limit of reduction by conductive pili is on the order of 15-20 microns. We are actively exploring the influence of hydrological conditions on the expression of different mechanisms of long-range EET, and the importance of extracellular cytochromes and pili conductivity on metal reduction.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86560", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86561" } }
{"authors":"Stephen Diggs::Scripps Institution of Oceanography--", "title":"IN23B-1730: The Good, The Bad, and The Ugly: Engaging the Science End-User in the 21st Century", "abstract":"What does it mean to engage a scientific user, and where do you start? What are the metrics for success in this process and how do you know if such an activity will lead to an overall improvement in the scientific workflow? These questions and many others help shape an organization’s engagement strategy, inform course corrections and should ultimately lead to prescribed successful outcomes. This analysis would be incomplete without a review of a diverse subset of previous engagement attempts at the institutional, national and international levels.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86561", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86562" } }
{"authors":"Cyrus Karas::GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research Kiel--Peter deMenocal::Columbia University of New York--Steven Goldstein::Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory of Columbia Univeristy--", "title":"PP21B-2235: DECIPHERING ANTARCTIC INTERMEDIATE WATER VARIABILITY DURING THE PLIO-PLEISTOCENE", "abstract":"Antarctic Intermediate Water (AAIW) plays a fundamental role in the modern global thermohaline circulation because it is the coldwater route from the Southern Hemisphere to the North Atlantic Ocean replacing North Atlantic Deep Water (NADW) (e.g. Oppo and Curry, 2012). Additionally, AAIW is also an important source water in (sub)tropical upwelling regions in the equatorial eastern Pacific and Benguela region (Kubota et al., 2014; Sarmiento et al., 2004). Deciphering AAIW variability through time is critical to understanding its role in global climate change (e.g. Santoso and England, 2004). Our study focuses on reconstructing AAIW during the warm Pliocene (~4 million years ago) and early Pleistocene. This time period marks the transition from warm Pliocene greenhouse conditions towards icehouse conditions, which most likely affected AAIW variability (Karas et al., 2011). To reconstruct changes in AAIW formation, northward extent and possible influence on (sub)tropical upwelling regions, we will use foraminiferal neodymium isotopes (εNd) and benthic Mg/Ca from South Atlantic Site 516 and Southwest Pacific Site 1125.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86562", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86563" } }
{"authors":"Robert Hamilton::George Fox University--Charles Haneberg::George Fox University--", "title":"SH53B-2508: Numerical Study of the Transverse Stability of Compressive and Rarefactive Alfven Solitons", "abstract":"A numerical study of the stability of DNLS bright and dark solitons subject to oblique perturbations is reported. The DNLS equation is a weakly nonlinear, weakly dispersive and one dimensional limiting form of MHD with the inclusion of Hall dispersion which has been shown to remain valid for plane wave propagation parallel, as well as quasiparallel, to the ambient magnetic field. Related analytic work has dealt with the transverse stability of circularly polarized Alfven waves [E. Mjolhus, T. Hada, J. Plasma Phys., 43, 257 – 268 (1990)] describing stability in relation to the propagation angle of the perturbation and the wave’s amplitude and wavenumber. The amplitude and wavenumber relation for transverse stability has a striking similarity to the criterion for modulational instability. A prior analytic work [M. S. Ruderman, Fluid Dyn. 22, 299, (1987)] found the dark soliton to be unstable. Our numerical results are established in the context of these analytic results. Additionally, the transverse stability properties of dark solitons will be addressed as they relate to their role in representing magnetic decreases observed in interplanetary space.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86563", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86564" } }
{"authors":"Vivek Patil::Energy and Geoscience Institute--Brian McPherson::Univ Utah--Joseph Moore::Energy & Geoscience Institute--Edward Trujillo::University of Utah--", "title":"H53H-1779: QUANTIFYING CONDITIONS FOR FAULT ‘SELF-SEALING’ IN GEOLOGIC CARBON SEQUESTRATION", "abstract":"Injecting anthropogenic CO2 into a subsurface reservoir for sequestration will impact the reservoir significantly, including its geochemistry, porosity and permeability. If a fault or fracture penetrates the reservoir, CO2-laden brine may migrate into that fault, eventually sealing it via precipitation or opening it up via dissolution. The goal of this study was to identify and quantify such conditions of fault self-sealing or self-enhancing. We found that the dimensionless Damköhler number (Da), the ratio of reaction rate to advection rate, provides a meaningful framework for characterizing the propensity of (fault) systems to seal or open up. We developed our own framework wherein Damköhler numbers evolve spatiotemporally as opposed to the traditional single Da value approach. Our approach enables us to use the Damköhler for characterization of complex multiphase and multimineral reactive transport problems. We applied this framework to 1D fault models with eight conditions derived from four geologic compositions and two reservoir conditions. The four­ geologic compositions were chosen such that three out of them were representative of distinct geologic end-members (sandstone, mudstone and dolomitic limestone) and one was a mixed composition based on an average of three end-member compositions. The two sets of P-T conditions chosen included one set corresponding to CO2 in a gaseous phase (“shallow conditions”) and the other corresponding to supercritical phase CO2 (“deep conditions”). Simulation results suggest that fault sealing via carbonate precipitation was a possibility for shallow conditions within limestone and mixed composition settings. The concentration of cations in the water was found to be an important control on the carbonate precipitation. The deep conditions models did not forecast self-sealing via carbonates. Sealing via clay precipitation is a likely possibility, but the 1000 year time-frame may be short for such. Model results indicated a range of Da values within which substantial reductions of fault porosity (meaning self-sealing) could be expected. A key conclusion suggested by the results of this study is that carbonate precipitation in the near-surface (top ~50-100 m) depths of a fault is the most likely mechanism of “self-sealing” for most geological settings.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86564", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86565" } }
{"authors":"Saikiran Tharimena::University of Southampton--Catherine Rychert::University of Southampton--Nicholas Harmon::University of Southampton--", "title":"DI24A-08: Global Seismic Imaging of the Lithosphere Asthenosphere Boundary", "abstract":"The lithosphere asthenosphere boundary (LAB) beneath oceans separates rigid, conductively cooling plates from the underlying warm ductile convecting mantle, characterized by low seismic wave velocities and high attenuation. The depth and nature of the lithosphere asthenosphere boundary is fundamental to our understanding of plate tectonics and mantle convection. Although conductive cooling models establish that oceanic lithosphere cools, thickens and subsides as it ages, this simple realization of the tectonic plates is not well understood. The depth, sharpness, composition and defining mechanism of the LAB remains elusive. Although oceanic lithosphere constitutes the bulk of the tectonic plates, precisely imaging the LAB has proved challenging. Here we use SS precursors from 25 years of seismic data to image and globally map the depth of the LAB across the Pacific, Atlantic and Indian Oceans. The result represents a vast improvement in lateral coverage of discontinuities in comparison to previous results. The depth of the discontinuity varies from 25 to 130 km within an error of ±5 km. We observe a general trend of increasing discontinuity depth with plate age, although some old oceanic lithosphere has shallower discontinuities. Overall, the results are suggestive of two distinct mantle layers.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86565", "section":"Earth's Deep Interior"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86566" } }
{"authors":"Denis Volkov::Cooperative Institute for Marine and Atmospheric Studies Miami--William Johns::Rosenstiel School for Marine and Atmospheric Sciences, University of Miami--Tatyana Belonenko::Saint Petersburg State University--Felix Landerer::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"G43B-1054: On the response of the Black Sea elevation to the Mediterranean Sea level", "abstract":"The response of the Black Sea elevation to sea level changes in the Mediterranean is studied using satellite altimetry data and a linear analytical model. We show that winds near the Strait of Gibraltar and over the Aegean Sea are able to dynamically change sea level in the Mediterranean and Black seas, respectively. The nonseasonal sea level in the Black Sea is coherent with that in the Aegean Sea and Sea of Marmara, but lags them by 10-38 days at sub-annual periods. The observed time lag is mainly due to friction that constrains the exchange through Bosphorus, and it represents the time required for the Black Sea level to adjust to locally and remotely forced changes of sea level in the Aegean Sea. The analytical model, employed in this study, is able to explain the amplitude and, to a large degree, phase of the response of the observed Black Sea elevation to sea level changes in the Sea of Marmara and Aegean Sea. The response is due to the barotropic flow through the Bosphorus Strait constrained mainly by friction. The geostrophic control is found to be important only at low and unrealistic friction (λs<1×10-5 s-1). Using a realistic friction coefficient (λs=3.8×10-5 s-1), we find that the magnitude of the response increases from 50 to 100% of the disturbance magnitude (10 cm) and the time lag increases from 17 to 25 days at period between 100 and 500 days. The inclusion of fresh water fluxes into the Black Sea in the model increases the magnitude of the response by about 5±1.5 cm, and the inclusion of the along-strait wind in the direction of the Black/Marmara Sea increases/decreases the magnitude of the response by about 1 cm at periods greater than 150 days. The phase of the response appears to be insensitive to both the wind stress and freshwater flux.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86566", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86567" } }
{"authors":"Kathryn Metcalf::University of Arizona--Paul Kapp::University of Arizona--Devon Orme::Stanford University--", "title":"T21E-2894: Dynamics and Preservation Potential of Subduction Complexes in Continental Sutures: A Case Study from the Sedimentary-Marix Mélange of the Indus-Yarlung Suture Zone in Southern Tibet", "abstract":"Intra-continental sutures are the geologic record of ancient subduction zones. Subduction complexes are a useful record of ancient continental collisions because they preserve sediments and/or blocks from units which have since eroded and are the first point of contact during collision. The India-Asia collision is one of the most-studied collisional orogens, but how much of the original subduction complex is preserved and what we can determine about the dynamics of the ancient subduction zone along the southern margin of Asia is poorly understood. Compared to other subduction complexes around the world, the complex preserved in the Indus Yarlung Suture Zone (IYSZ) of southern Tibet is anomalous. Blueschist facies metamorphism, a prominent mineral assemblage along intra-continental suture zones, is common in the northwest Himalaya, but not found along the central segment of the IYSZ. Most of the subduction complex is greenschist facies, inconsistent with the geotherm for a subduction zone. We present a metamorphic history for the greenschist facies rocks to reconcile this contradiction. A deep forearc basin (~5-8 km) developed during the Cretaceous, requiring an accretionary subduction zone, a topographic or structural outer forearc high behind which to trap sediment, and/or basal subduction erosion. The preserved subduction complex is almost entirely tectonic sedimentary-matrix mélange with minor outcrops of overlying turbidites. We present evidence from detrital zircon U-Pb geochronology of sandstones that indicate along-strike variability in the provenance of the sedimentary-matrix mélange. For example, both lower and upper plate material are present near the town of Ngamring, while regions along-strike to the west contain little to no upper plate material. The blocks in the sedimentary-matrix mélange are well-mixed throughout kilometers of exposed width. Sandstone blocks of Tethyan affinity, which could have entered the trench only at the onset of collision, are well mixed with oceanic blocks offscraped from the subducting Neo-Tethyan plate.. Mixing must have occurred within a few Myr as deformation quickly stepped southward. This rapid juxtaposition is unexplained by current models of accretionary complex deformation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86567", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86568" } }
{"authors":"Leigh Bernacchi::University of California Merced--", "title":"PA13A-2170: Serving California’s Science and Governance Needs through Crisis-driven Collaborations", "abstract":"Due to its magnitude, the ongoing drought in California (USA) serves as an experimental space for innovative resource management and will define responses to predicted widespread drought. Due to the magnitude of its effect on humans and natural ecosystems and the water resources on which they depend, governmental programs are granting support to scientifically-valid, locally-produced solutions to water scarcity. Concurrently, University of California Water (UC Water) Security and Sustainability Research Initiative is focused on strategic research to build the knowledge base for better water resources management. This paper examines how a team of transdisciplinary scientists are engaged in water governance and information, providing examples of actionable research successfully implemented by decision makers. From a sociology of science perspective, UC Water scientists were interviewed about their engagement practices with California water decision makers. Their “co-production of knowledge” relationships produce effective responses to climatic, landcover and population changes by expanding from singularly information-based, unidirectional communication to governance-relevant, co-constructed knowledge and wisdom. This is accomplished by serving on decision making organizational boards and developing information in a productive format. The perceived crisis of California’s drought is an important impetus in cross-sector collaborations, and in combination with governance and institution parameters, defines the inquiry and decision space. We conclude by describing a process of clear problem-solution definition made possible through transparent communication, salient and credible information, and relevant tools and techniques for interpreting scientific findings.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86568", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86569" } }
{"authors":"Lauren Smalls-Mantey::Drexel University--Romano Foti::Drexel University--Franco Montalto::US Forest Service--", "title":"H24F-07: Assessing the Performance of Large Scale Green Roofs and Their Impact on the Urban Microclimate", "abstract":"In ultra-urban environments green roofs offer a feasible solution to add green infrastructure (GI) in neighborhoods where space is limited. Green roofs offer the typical advantages of urban GI such as stormwater reduction and management while providing direct benefits to the buildings on which they are installed through thermal protection and mitigation of temperature fluctuations. At 6.8 acres, the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center (JJCC) in New York City, hosts the second largest green roof in the United States. Since its installation in August 2013, the Sustainable Water Resource (SWRE) Laboratory at Drexel University has monitored the climate on and around the green roof by means of four weather stations situated on various roof and ground locations. Using two years of fine scale climatic data collected at the JJCC, this study explores the energy balance of a large scale green roof system. Temperature, radiation, evapotranspiration and wind profiles pre- and post- installation of the JJCC green roof were analyzed and compared across monitored locations, with the goal of identifying the impact of the green roof on the building and urban micro-climate. Our findings indicate that the presence of the green roof, not only altered the climatic conditions above the JJCC, but also had a measurable impact on the climatic profile of the areas immediately surrounding it. Furthermore, as a result of the mitigation of roof temperature fluctuations and of the cooling provided during warmer months, an improvement of the building thermal efficiency was contextually observed. Such findings support the installation of GI as an effective practice in urban settings and important in the discussion of key issues including energy conservation measures, carbon emission reductions and the mitigation of urban heat islands.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86569", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86570" } }
{"authors":"Andrew Slater::National Snow and Ice Data Center--", "title":"A13C-0355: Surface Solar Radiation in North America: Observations, Reanalyses, Satellite and Derived Products", "abstract":"Observations of daily surface solar/shortwave radiation data from over 4000 stations have been gathered, covering much of the lower 48 continental states of the US as well as portions of Alberta and British Columbia, Canada. The quantity of data increases almost linearly from 1998 when only several hundred stations had data. A quality control procedure utilizing threshold values along with computing the clear sky radiation envelope for individual stations was implemented to both screen bad data and rescue informative data. Over two thirds of the observations are seen as acceptable. Fifteen different surface solar radiation products are assessed relative to observations, including reanalyses (20thC, CFSRR, ERAI, JRA-55, MERRA, NARR, NCEP), derived products (CRU_NCEP, DAYMET, GLDAS, GSWP3, MsTMIP, NLDAS) and two satellite products (CERES and GOES). All except the CERES product are daily or finer in temporal resolution. The root mean square error of spatial biases is greater than 18Wm-2 for 13 of the 15 products over the summer season (June, July, August). None of the daily resolution products fulfill all three desirable criteria of low (<5%) annual or seasonal bias, high correlation with observed cloudiness and correct distribution of clear sky radiation. Some products display vestiges of underlying algorithm issues (e.g. from MTCLIM ver4.3) or bias correction methods. A new bias correction method is introduced that preserves clear sky radiation values and better replicates cloudiness statistics. The current quantity of data over the continental US suggests a solar radiation product based on, or enhanced with, observations is feasible.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86570", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86572" } }
{"authors":"Othman Elhelou::University of Louisiana at Lafayette--Carl Richter::University of Louisiana at Lafayette--", "title":"B11D-0476: Magnetic susceptibility mapping of fly ash in soil samples near a coal-burning power plant in Pointe Coupee Parish, Louisiana.", "abstract":"Atmospheric deposition of pollutants is a major health and environmental concern. In a 2010 study, the CATF attributed over 13,000 deaths each year to fly ash and other fine particles emitted by U.S. coal-burning power plants. The magnetic properties of fly ash allows for mapping an area suspect of PM pollution faster and more efficiently than by conducting chemical analysis as the former alternative. The objective of this study is to detect the presence of magnetic particles related to the migration of fly ash from a nearby coal power plant over parts of Pointe Coupee Parish, LA. This is based on the idea that the fly ash that is released into the atmosphere during the coal burning process contains heavy metals and magnetic particles in the form of ferrospheres, which can be used to trace back to the source. Maps of the top and sub soil were generated to differentiate the magnetic susceptibility values of the heavy metals potentially attributed to the migration and settling of fly ash onto the surface from any pre-existing or naturally occurring heavy metals in the sub soil. A 60 km2 area in Pointe Coupee Parish was investigated in approximately 0.5 km2 subsets. The area in Pointe Coupee Parish, LA was selected because land use is predominantly rural with the Big Cajun II power plant as the main contributor for air borne contaminants. Samples of fly ash obtained directly from the source below one of the power plant’s precipitators were also analyzed to verify the field and laboratory analysis. Contour maps representing the spatial distribution of fly ash over Pointe Coupee, LA, along with histograms of magnetic susceptibility values, and chemical analysis all indicate a correlation between the proximity to the power plant and the predominant wind direction. Acquisition curves of the isothermal remnant magnetization demonstrate the presence of predominantly low coercivity minerals (magnetite) with a small amount of a high-coercivity phase. The microstructure of the magnetic fractions of the fly ash along with select top and sub soil samples were observed using a reflective light microscope for identifying and confirming the presence of ferrospheres associated with fly ash. Chemical analyses of select samples revealed their heavy metal composition and the correlation with their SIRM and low field mass susceptibility values.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86572", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86573" } }
{"authors":"Adriadna Chávez-Jiménez::University of Piura--Alfredo Granados::Technical University of Madrid--Luis Garrote::Technical University of Madrid--", "title":"H41G-1464: Reliability-Productivity Curve, a Tool for Adaptation Measures Identification", "abstract":"Due to climate change effects, water scarcity problems would intensify in several regions. These problems are going to impact negatively in the water low-priority demands, since these will be reduced in favor of those with high-priority. An example would be the reduction of agriculture water resources in favor of the urban ones. Then, it is important the evaluation of adaptation measures for a better water resources management. An important tool to face this challenge is the economic valuation of the water demands’ impact within a water resources system. In agriculture this valuation is usually performed through the water productivity evaluation. The water productivity evaluation requires detailed information regarding the different crops like the applied technology, the agricultural supplies management, the water availability, etc. This is a restriction for an evaluation at basin scale due to the difficulty of gathers this level of detailed information. Besides, only the water availability is taken into account, but not the period when the water is distributed (i.e. water resources reliability). Water resources reliability is one of the most important variables in water resources management. This research proposes a methodology to determine the agriculture water productivity, using as variables the crops information, the crops price, the water resources availability, and the water resources reliability, at a basin scale. This methodology would allow identifying general water resources adaptation measures, providing the basis for further detailed studies in critical regions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86573", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86575" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"IN41C-1716: Application of Alignment Methodologies to Spatial Ontologies in the Hydro Domain", "abstract":"Ontologies are playing an increasing role in facilitating mediation and translation between datasets representing diverse schemas, vocabularies, or knowledge communities. This role is relatively straightforward when there is one ontology comprising all relevant common concepts that can be mapped to entities in each dataset. Frequently, one common ontology has not been agreed to. Either each dataset is represented by a distinct ontology, or there are multiple candidates for commonality. Either the one most appropriate (expressive, relevant, correct) ontology must be chosen, or else concepts and relationships matched across multiple ontologies through an alignment process so that they may be used in concert to carry out mediation or other semantic operations. A resulting alignment can be effective to the extent that entities in in the ontologies represent differing terminology for comparable conceptual knowledge. In cases such as spatial ontologies, though, ontological entities may also represent disparate conceptualizations of space according to the discernment methods and application domains on which they are based. One ontology’s wetland concept may overlap in space with another ontology’s recharge zone or wildlife range or water feature.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86575", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86576" } }
{"authors":"Wei Zhang::Michigan State University--Cheng-Hua Liu::Michigan State University--Gemini Bhalsod::Michigan State University--Yingjie Zhang::Michigan State University--Ya-Hui Chuang::Michigan State University--Stephen Boyd::Michigan State University--Brian Teppen::Michigan State University--James Tiedje::Michigan State University--Hui Li::Michigan State University--", "title":"H21G-1473: Sorption, Uptake, and Translocation of Pharmaceuticals across Multiple Interfaces in Soil Environment", "abstract":"Pharmaceuticals are contaminants of emerging concern frequently detected in soil and water environments, raising serious questions on their potential impact on human and ecosystem health. Overuse and environmental release of antibiotics (i.e., a group of pharmaceuticals extensively used in human medicine and animal agriculture) pose enormous threats to the health of human, animal, and the environment, due to proliferation of antibiotic resistant bacteria. Recently, we have examined interactions of pharmaceuticals with soil geosorbents, bacteria, and vegetable crops in order to elucidate pathways of sorption, uptake, and translocation of pharmaceuticals across the multiple interfaces in soils. Sorption of pharmaceuticals by biochars was studied to assess the potential of biochar soil amendment for reducing the transport and bioavailability of antibiotics. Our preliminary results show that carbonaceous materials such as biochars and activated carbon had strong sorption capacities for antibiotics, and consequently decreased the uptake and antibiotic resistance gene expression by an Escherichia coli bioreporter. Thus, biochar soil amendment showed the potential for reducing selection pressure on antibiotic resistant bacteria. Additionally, since consumption of pharmaceutical-tainted food is a direct exposure pathway for humans, it is important to assess the uptake and accumulation of pharmaceuticals in food crops grown in contaminated soils or irrigated with reclaimed water. Therefore, we have investigated the uptake and accumulations of pharmaceuticals in greenhouse-grown lettuce under contrasting irrigation practices (i.e., overhead or surface irrigations). Preliminary results indicate that greater pharmaceutical concentrations were measured in overhead irrigated lettuce than in surface irrigated lettuce. This could have important implications when selecting irrigation scheme to use the reclaimed water for crop irrigation. In summary, proper soil and water management is needed to minimize the transfer of pharmaceuticals from soil and water to biota.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86576", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86577" } }
{"authors":"Ye Tian::IAP Insititute of Atmospheric Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences--", "title":"AE31B-0428: Comparison between two methods of pseudo 3D location and traditional waveform characteristics in lightning classification", "abstract":"This study compares two methods in the lightning classification, mainly positive and negative cloud-to-ground (CG) lightning and intra-cloud (IC) lightning, based on broadband observations of VLF emissions obtained by Beijing Lightning Network (BLnet). For the first method, the pseudo 3D location technique that is analogous to Betz et al. (2004) is utilized to separate CG and IC lightning on the basis of emission heights of the discharge processes. According to the polarity of the relative pulses, CG are further divided into +CG and –CG. Similar to the technique adopted in the U.S. National Lightning Detection Network (NLDN), the other traditional method takes advantage of the analyses of characteristics of the fast electric field or magnetic field waveforms in the time domain, including rising time, falling time, pulse width, peak ratios, etc. Through the comparison, it is achieved that the critical height of roughly 1 km is appropriate to be used to classify CG and IC lightning in the 3D lightning location system. In addition, for the distant lightning, the lightning types are tended to be classified as CG by these two methods.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86577", "section":"Atmospheric and Space Electricity"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86578" } }
{"authors":"Sapna Rana::Victoria University of Wellington--James Renwick::Victoria University of Wellington--James McGregor::Victoria University of Wellington--", "title":"A51K-0229: Precipitation Seasonality over the Indian Subcontinent: Assessment of Gauge, Reanalyses and Satellite Products", "abstract":"This work addresses the seasonal (winter, pre-monsoon, monsoon and post-monsoon) performance of seven precipitation products from three different data sources: gridded station data, satellite-derived data and reanalyses products over the Indian Subcontinent, for a period of 10 years (1997/98 to 2006/07). Precipitation products evaluated are the Asian Precipitation – Highly Resolved Observational Data Integration Towards Evaluation of Water Resources (APHRODITE), the Climate Prediction Center unified gauge (CPC-uni), the Global Precipitation Climatology project (GPCP), Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) post real-time research products (3B42-V6 and 3B42-V7), the Climate Forecast System Reanalysis (CFSR) and the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) Interim Re-Analysis (ERA-Interim). Several verification measures are employed to assess the accuracy of the data. All datasets capture the large-scale characteristics of the seasonal mean precipitation distribution, albeit with pronounced seasonal and/or regional differences. Compared to APHRODITE, the gauge-only (CPC-uni) and the satellite-derived precipitation products (GPCP, 3B42-V6 and 3B42-V7) capture the summer monsoon rainfall variability better than CFSR and ERA-Interim. Similar conclusions were drawn for the post-monsoon season, with the exception of 3B42-V7, which underestimates post-monsoon precipitation. Over mountainous regions 3B42-V7 shows an appreciable improvement over 3B42-V6 and other gauge-based precipitation products. Significantly large biases/errors occur during the winter months, which is likely related to the uncertainty in observations that artificially inflate the existing error in reanalyses and satellite retrievals.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86578", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86579" } }
{"authors":"Hunter Knox::Sandia National Laboratories--Mark Grubelich::Sandia National Laboratories--Leiph Preston::Sandia National Laboratories--James Knox::Sandia National Laboratories--Dennis King::Sandia National Laboratories--", "title":"H51M-1573: Imaging Fracture Networks Using Angled Crosshole Seismic Logging and Change Detection Techniques", "abstract":"We present results from a SubTER funded series of cross borehole geophysical imaging efforts designed to characterize fracture zones generated with an alternative stimulation method, which is being developed for Enhanced Geothermal Systems (EGS). One important characteristic of this stimulation method is that each detonation will produce multiple fractures without damaging the wellbore. To date, we have collected six full data sets with ~30k source-receiver pairs each for the purposes of high-resolution cross borehole seismic tomographic imaging. The first set of data serves as the baseline measurement (i.e. un-stimulated), three sets evaluate material changes after fracture emplacement and/or enhancement, and two sets are used for evaluation of pick error and seismic velocity changes attributable to changing environmental factors (i.e. saturation due to rain/snowfall in the shallow subsurface). Each of the six datasets has been evaluated for data quality and first arrivals have been picked on nearly 200k waveforms in the target area. Each set of data is then inverted using a Vidale-Hole finite-difference 3-D eikonal solver in two ways: 1) allowing for iterative ray tracing and 2) with fixed ray paths determined from the test performed before the fracture stimulation of interest. Utilizing these two methods allows us to compare and contrast the results from two commonly used change detection techniques. Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-program laboratory managed and operated by Sandia Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Lockheed Martin Corporation, for the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-AC04-94AL85000.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86579", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86581" } }
{"authors":"Jasper Vrugt::University of California Irvine--", "title":"H31M-03: The Scientific Method, Diagnostic Bayes, and How to Detect Epistemic Errors", "abstract":"In the past decades, Bayesian methods have found widespread application and use in environmental systems modeling. Bayes theorem states that the posterior probability, P(H|D) of a hypothesis, H is proportional to the product of the prior probability, P(H) of this hypothesis and the likelihood, L(H|\hat{D, "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86581", "section":"Hydrology"})$ of the same hypothesis given the new/incoming observations, \hat{D, "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86581", "section":"Hydrology"}. In science and engineering, H often constitutes some numerical simulation model, D = F(x,.) which summarizes using algebraic, empirical, and differential equations, state variables and fluxes, all our theoretical and/or practical knowledge of the system of interest, and x are the d unknown parameters which are subject to inference using some data, \hat{D, "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86581", "section":"Hydrology"} of the observed system response. The Bayesian approach is intimately related to the scientific method and uses an iterative cycle of hypothesis formulation (model), experimentation and data collection, and theory/hypothesis refinement to elucidate the rules that govern the natural world. Unfortunately, model refinement has proven to be very difficult in large part because of the poor diagnostic power of residual based likelihood functions \citep{gupta2008, "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86581", "section":"Hydrology"}. This has inspired \cite{vrugt2013, "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86581", "section":"Hydrology"} to advocate the use of 'likelihood-free' inference using approximate Bayesian computation (ABC). This approach uses one or more summary statistics, S(\hat{D, "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86581", "section":"Hydrology"}) of the original data, \hat{D, "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86581", "section":"Hydrology"} designed ideally to be sensitive only to one particular process in the model. Any mismatch between the observed and simulated summary metrics is then easily linked to a specific model component. A recurrent issue with the application of ABC is self-sufficiency of the summary statistics. In theory, S(.) should contain as much information as the original data itself, yet complex systems rarely admit sufficient statistics. In this article, we propose to combine the ideas of ABC and regular Bayesian inference to guarantee that no information is lost in diagnostic model evaluation. This hybrid approach, coined diagnostic Bayes, uses the summary metrics as prior distribution and original data in the likelihood function, or P(x|\hat{D, "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86581", "section":"Hydrology"}) \propto P(x|S(\hat{D, "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86581", "section":"Hydrology"})) L(x|\hat{D, "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86581", "section":"Hydrology"})$. A case study illustrates the ability of the proposed methodology to diagnose epistemic errors and provide guidance on model refinement.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86581", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86583" } }
{"authors":"Harsh Shah::Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar--Vimal Mishra::Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar--", "title":"H51H-1492: Development of a real time streamflow monitoring system for the Indian sub-continental basins", "abstract":"Real-time streamflow monitoring is essential in the Indian sub-continental river basins as a large population is affected by floods. Moreover, streamflow monitoring may help in managing the water resources in the agriculture dominated region. In the Indian sub-continental basins, it is challenging to obtain the real time information of streamflow, which is valuable for reservoir operations, water management, and flood forecasts. We setup the Variable Infiltration Capacity (VIC) hydrological model at daily temporal resolution and 0.25◦ spatial resolution using the bias corrected satellite precipitation product from the Tropical rainfall Measurement Mission Real Time (TRMM-3B42RTV7) and bias corrected temperature product from the Global Ensemble Forecast System (GEFS), version 2. Near-real-time precipitation and temperatures are bias corrected using the historic precipitation and temperature data from the India Meteorological Department (IMD). Moreover, we evaluated data assimilation approaches to improve the real-time monitoring of streamflow in the sub-continental basins.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86583", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86584" } }
{"authors":"Chase Kasmerchak::University of Wisconsin Madison--Joseph Mason::Univ. of Wisconsin-Madison--", "title":"B21D-0478: Understanding the prairie-forest transitional zone in northern Minnesota through variations in soil chemistry", "abstract":"Boundaries between soil types are not discrete, but instead there are transitional zones that exhibit characteristics of soil types that they border. The prairie-forest transitional zone is seen throughout North America and Eurasia. Prairie soils (Mollisols) and deciduous forest soils (Alfisols) demonstrate interesting contrasts in morphology. Understanding variations in chemical properties is key to understanding nutrient cycling and retention, ecosystem development, and furthering the field of soil geography. Research sites are located in northern Minnesota’s eastern forest, western prairie, and the transitional forested zone between. Evidence of clay translocation is a key indicator of Alfisol development. The double layer theory suggests chemical factors allowing clays to be dispersed/flocculated are ionic strength of the solution, relative abundance of Na+ and di- or trivalent cations, and pH (Sposito, 1984; van Olphen, 1977). In initial stages of soil formation exchangeable bases (Na+, K+, Ca++, and Mg++) occupy 100% of clay exchange sites, but as soil develops are these replaced by acidity ions (H+ and Al3+) and base saturation decreases. The relationship between exchangeable cations and clay dispersion is understood in lower horizons where Ca++ and Mg++ are abundant, and clay is flocculated, but this is not well understood in upper horizons. However it is suggested that clay dispersion can occur in upper horizons of pH values between 7 and 5 (van Breeman and Buurman, 2002). CEC values are expected to be much higher in soils where clay is flocculated and base ion concentration is high. Preliminary analyses supports that differences in these chemical factors are key indicators of varying rates of soil development, and explain geographic distribution of soils in this region. Through further lab work and data analysis, the relative importance of these chemical properties will come to light and the drivers prairie-forest soil transition will be better understood.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86584", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86585" } }
{"authors":"Seebany Datta-Barua::Illinois Institute of Technology--Daniel Miladinovich::Illinois Institute of Technology--Jonathan Makela::University of Illinois--Gary Bust::JHU Applied Physics Lab--", "title":"SA31E-2381: Assimilating Storm-time Neutral Winds in Ionospheric-Thermospheric State Estimation", "abstract":"During geomagnetic storms at mid-latitudes both electrodynamic disturbances and neutral composition variations contribute to time evolving and localized variations in the plasma content of the ionosphere. While the most plentiful data are typically Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) based measurements of total electron content (TEC), assimilation of measurements of the ionospheric-thermospheric state itself, i.e., neutral winds, can improve the fidelity of the result. Fabry-Perot interferometers (FPIs) measure emissions of thermospheric oxygen, giving line-of-sight wind speeds. During storm-times however, these FPI measurements may also detect a non-thermal oxygen source, yielding a measurement that is not strictly of the thermospheric wind [Makela et al., 2014]. The sign of non-thermal oxygen is in the apparent large 50 to 100 m/s vertical winds. This raises the question: what happens when we try to assimilate direct measurements of the wind but some of those measurements are “contaminated” by a non-thermal source? We present results of a Kalman Filtered data assimilative experiment ingesting neutral wind measurements made by a 630.0 nm FPI sited in the mid-latitude U.S. during the geomagnetic storm of October 25, 2011. Ionospheric Data Assimilation 4-Dimensional (IDA4D) estimates time-varying plasma densities from GNSS TEC. These densities are ingested without, and with, respectively, FPI neutral wind data into Estimating Model Parameters with Ionospheric Reverse Engineering (EMPIRE). EMPIRE uses background electric potential and neutral wind models, to produce an optimized estimate of both ExB drift and neutral wind based on the data ingested. We compare the estimated horizontal neutral wind at the FPI measurement locations at about 250 km altitude, first using electron densities without ingesting FPI data. Then plasma densities plus half the FPI data are ingested to estimate neutral winds. These wind estimates are then compared to the FPI data that were not ingested. During periods of strong apparent vertical winds, the estimate of wind disagrees with the FPI measurement, indicating that the data contamination is indeed non-thermospheric. The assimilated estimate agrees quite well with the measurement actually made at that location when FPI data are only thermospheric.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86585", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86587" } }
{"authors":"Michael Schwartz::Argonne National Laboratory--Virendra Ghate::Argonne National Laboratory--Jothiram Vivekanandan::University Corporation for Atmospheric Research--Peisang Tsai::University Corporation for Atmospheric Research--Scott Ellis::University Corporation for Atmospheric Research--", "title":"A51I-0196: Retrievals of Vertical Air Motion from the HIAPER Cloud Radar during CSET", "abstract":"Marine boundary layer cumulus and stratocumulus clouds are significant factors in the Earth’s climate system and hence need to be accurately represented in Global Climate Model (GCM) simulations. One feature germane to these clouds, and where GCMs encounter difficulty, is the transition from stratocumulus- to cumulus-capped marine boundary layers (MBLs). This transition is climatologically important due to the large decreases in cloud cover and to the significant changes in boundary layer structure that accompany it. An important component of understanding this transition is the ability to characterize the evolution of the vertical velocity structure of the MBL.  During the Cloud System Evolution in the Trades (CSET) field program, held in July and August 2015, the NSF/NCAR Gulfstream-V High-performance Instrumented Airborne Platform for Environmental Research (GV HIAPER) aircraft made several transects from California to Hawaii to characterize the stratocumulus to Cumulus transition. The GV-HIAPER carried several remote sensing and in situ instruments for observing aerosol, cloud, precipitation, radiation and meteorological properties. Within selected air masses, flight legs were conducted above, inside, and below the cloud layers during aircraft transits from California to Hawaii. The same air masses (as determined by parcel trajectory analysis) were resampled on the return flight to California a day later. Of particular importance to studying MBL clouds are the HIAPER Cloud Radar (HCR) and the High Spectral Resolution Lidar (HSRL), which provided mapping of aerosol, cloud, and precipitation structures. From the W-band HCR, full radar Doppler spectra were calculated at 0.5 sec resolution. The 532 nm HSRL was fully calibrated and used to retrieve the aerosol extinction profiles. We have first combined the data collected by the HCR and the HSRL to create a hydrometeor mask, which will be used to characterize changes in the cloud structure. The Doppler spectrum from the ocean surface echoes, together with aircraft motion data, will be used to ameliorate the radar beam broadening due to aircraft motion. After accounting for the aircraft motion we will explore techniques to retrieve the vertical air motion and cloud microphysical variables from the radar Doppler spectrum.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86587", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86588" } }
{"authors":"Josh Hedgepeth::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--Britney Schmidt::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--Catherine Walker::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus--", "title":"C11B-0762: Tracking the Propagation and Effects of Crevasses in the Helheim Glacier in Greenland", "abstract":"That calving events in Greenland’s glaciers generally occur in the form of many small pieces collapsing from the ice front, rather than the large, tabular style often observed in Antarctic ice shelves is related to the high level of crevassing observed in these glaciers. However, the actual transition mechanism from intact, crevassed glacier—possessing a large amount of gravitational potential and fracture energy—to what is essentially a rubble pile in the proglacial fjords below remains something of a mystery. What is the relationship between the crevasse patterns, glacier flow, and calving rate? We present results from a study to better understand these questions. We focused on Helheim Glacier. Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) and LandSat images downloaded from the USGS Earth Explorer were employed, for years 2001, 2003-2010, and 2012-2015. These images were used to electronically trace crevasse patterns in the ice. Additionally, we track the terminus position over each year, which reached its maximum retreat in 2005. Since then, the position has fluctuated forward and backward barely reaching halfway between the 2001 and 2005 terminus positions. We measure sizes and density of icebergs in the immediate area of the terminus. Iceberg concentration was studied using yearly snapshots and weekly snapshots for 2012 through 2013. We find large crevassed icebergs in 2006, suggestive of a recent calving event. Greenland Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) air temperature data is used to study the environmental variations between each snapshot. Over our observation time period (2001-2014), we compare our traced crevasse patterns to assess variability over time, finding that the density of crevasses increases nearer to the front.. We will report relationships between this spatial-temporal variability to changing atmospheric and flow conditions to better understand factors that control surface modification of Greenland’s glaciers. We will compare the variable crevasse patterns to the density and size of icebergs in the fjord in order to determine a correlation between changing glacier surface setting and the size of calved blocks. Further analysis is planned to understand the energy system influencing Helheim glacier’s surface crevasses.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86588", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86589" } }
{"authors":"Mohammad Heshmati::University of Wyoming--Mohammad Piri::University of Wyoming--Matthew Stegmeir::TSI Incorporated--", "title":"H23D-1607: Pore-scale investigation of two-phase flow using micro particle image velocimetry", "abstract":"Utilizing a two phase, two fields of view (FOV) Micro Particle Image Velocimetry (uPIV) system, simultaneous flow of oil and water in PDMS and glass porous systems are studied. We use glass and PDMS micromodels that are water- and oil-wet, respectively. They allow the study the effect of wettability on the flow. The velocity field of each phase is resolved in real-time and space using two high speed 4 MP cameras and a high repetition dual-head laser for small FOV and two 29 MP cameras and a low repetition dual-head powerful laser for the large FOV. Small FOV part of the system is used to investigate details of the flow at the pore scale and the interactions between the fluids and the medium. The large FOV is used to resolve the velocity over the entire micromodel. High-resolution micro-CT images of Bentheimer sandstone are used to construct two-dimensional. Single- and two-phase flow experiments are performed in these models. In the two-phase flow tests, imbibition and drainage experiments are carried out to obtain capillary pressure-saturation curves for different flow combinations. The velocity fields are resolved during each imbibition and drainage test and the effect of saturation of each phase on the velocity field is shown.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86589", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86590" } }
{"authors":"Kathy Davenport::Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University--John Hole::Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University--Basil Tikoff::Univ Wisconsin--Steve Harder::University of Texas at El Paso--", "title":"T11D-2919: Evidence for a Moho-penetrating steep accretionary margin from the EarthScope Idaho-Oregon controlled-source seismic survey", "abstract":"Seismic refraction and wide-angle reflection travel times from the EarthScope IDOR controlled-source seismic survey were inverted to derive crustal velocity structure in the U.S. Cordillera of Idaho and Oregon. The P-wave velocity model and preliminary analysis of the shear waves reveal a near-vertical boundary that juxtaposes accreted island-arc terranes against Precambrian North America and the Idaho batholith. Post-accretion transpression across the western Idaho shear zone (WISZ) steepened and narrowed the original suture zone to ~5 km at the surface. The seismic data indicate that the WISZ penetrates the entire crust and offsets the Moho by ~7-8 km. The lithosphere of this region has been significantly modified since activity on the WISZ by emplacement of the Idaho batholith, Challis volcanism, the Columbia River Basalts, and Basin and Range-style extension. The crust west of the WISZ is characterized by faster P-wave velocities consistent with oceanic-arc crust and an average Moho depth of ~32 km. A very strong wide-angle reflector and higher seismic velocity are observed in the lower crust beneath the feeder dike system for the Columbia River Basalts; these features are interpreted to represent mafic magmatic underplating. In contrast, the crust east of the WISZ has a much slower P-wave velocity indicating a felsic-to-intermediate composition, and the Moho depth is close to 40 km. There are no major differences in intra-crustal reflectivity or seismic velocity between the Idaho batholith and the adjacent cratonic crust, and there is no evidence of a mafic magmatic residual beneath the Idaho batholith. The strong lateral contrasts across the WISZ provide evidence of inheritance and structural influence by this steepened boundary on the subsequent tectonic events.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86590", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86591" } }
{"authors":"Esther Salinas::University of Texas at El Paso--", "title":"NH51A-1856: Assessing the Cytotoxicity of Black Carbon As A Model for Ultrafine Anthropogenic Aerosol Across Human and Murine Cells: A Chronic Exposure Model of Nanosized Particulate Matter", "abstract":"Combustion-derived nanomaterials or ultrafine (<1 μm) atmospheric aerosols are primarily products of anthropogenic activities, such as the burning of fossil fuels. Ultrafine particles (UFPs) can absorb other noxious pollutants including volatile organic compounds (VOCs), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), toxic organic compounds, and heavy metals. The combination of high population density, meteorological conditions, and industrial productivity brings high levels of air pollution to the metropolitan area of El Paso, Texas, USA/ Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua, Mexico, comprising the Paso del Norte air basin. A study conducted by scientists from the Research Triangle Park in North Carolina, analyzed sites adjacent to heavy-traffic highways in El Paso and elucidated higher UFP concentrations in comparison to previously published work exploring pollution and adverse health effects in the basin. UFPs can penetrate deep into the alveolar sacs of the lung, reaching distant alveolar sacs and inducing a series of immune responses that are detrimental to the body: evidence suggests that UFPs can also cross the alveolar-blood barrier and potentially endanger the body’s immune response. The physical properties of UFPs and the dynamics of local atmospheric and topographical conditions indicate that emissions of nanosized carbonaceous aerosols could pose significant threats to biological tissues upon inhalation by local residents of the Paso del Norte. This study utilizes Black Carbon (BC) as a model for environmental UFPs and its effects on the immunological response. An in vitro approach is used to measure the ability of BC to promote cell death upon long-term exposure. Human epithelial lung cells (A549), human peripheral-blood monocytes (THP-1), murine macrophages (RAW264.7), and murine epithelial lung cells (LA-4) were treated with BC and assessed for metabolic activity after chronic exposure utilizing three distinct and independent cell viability assays. The cell viability experiments included a chronic study at 7, 10, and 14 days of UFP exposure at six different concentrations of BC: 100μM, 300μM, 600μM, 1,250μM, 2,500μM, and 5,000μM conducting the Trypan Blue (TB) Exclusion Assay, Calcein-AM Viability Assay, and CellTiter-Glo Viability Assay.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86591", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86592" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"C21A-0700: Into the Deep Black Sea: The Icefin Modular AUV for Ice-Covered Ocean Exploration", "abstract":"The Icefin autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) was designed to enable long-range oceanographic exploration of physical and biological ocean environments in ice-covered regions. The vehicle is capable of surveying under-ice geometry, ice and ice-ocean interface properties, as well as water column conditions beneath the ice interface. It was developed with both cryospheric and planetary-analog exploration in mind. The first Icefin prototype was successfully operated in Antarctica in Austral summer 2014. The vehicle was deployed through a borehole in the McMurdo Ice Shelf near Black Island and successfully collected sonar, imaging, video and water column data down to 450 m depth. Icefin was developed using a modular design. Each module is designed to perform specific tasks, dependent on the mission objective. Vehicle control and data systems can be stably developed, and power modules added or subtracted for mission flexibility. Multiple sensor bays can be developed in parallel to serve multiple science objectives. This design enables the vehicle to have greater depth capability as well as improved operational simplicity compared to larger vehicles with equivalent capabilities. As opposed to those vehicles that require greater logistics and associated costs, Icefin can be deployed through boreholes drilled in the ice. Thus, Icefin satisfies the demands of achieving sub-ice missions while maintaining a small form factor and easy deployment necessary for repeated, low-logistical impact field programs.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86592", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86594" } }
{"authors":"Dana Thomas::Stanford University--Ferdinand Hingerl::Stanford University--Charlotte Garing::Stanford University--Dennis Bird::Stanford University--Sally Benson::Stanford University--Katharine Maher::Stanford University--", "title":"H41C-1305: Hydrologic Responses to CO2 Injection in Basalts Based on Flow-through Experiments", "abstract":"Experimental studies of basalt-CO2 interactions have increased our ability to predict geochemical responses within a mafic reservoir during geologic CO2 sequestration. However, the lack of flow-through experiments prevents the use of coupled hydrologic-geochemical models to predict evolution of permeability and porosity, critical parameters for assessing storage feasibility. We present here results of three flow-through experiments on an intact basalt core during which we employed X-ray Computed Tomography (CT) to quantify porosity evolution and fluid flow. Using a single core of glassy basaltic tuff from the Snake River Plain (Menan Buttes complex), we performed tracer tests using a solution of NaI (~100,000 ppm) before and after injection of CO2-saturated water at reservoir conditions (90 bar, 50°C) to image porosity and flow path distribution. During the tracer tests, CT scans were taken at 2.5-minute intervals, and outlet fluid was discretely sampled at the same intervals and subsequently measured via ICP-MS, enabling interpretation of the tracer breakthrough curve through both imaging and geochemical analyses. Comparison of the porosity distribution from before and after injection of CO2 shows an overall decrease in core-averaged porosity from 34% to 31.1%. Permeability decreased exponentially from ~4.9x10-12 m2 to 1.18 x10-12 m2. The decrease in porosity and permeability suggests geochemical transformations in the mineral assemblage of the core, which we observe through petrographic analysis of an unaltered sample of the same lithology in contrast with the altered core. There is a significant increase in grain coatings, as well as reduction in the grain size, suggesting dissolution re-precipitation mechanisms. Finally, to develop a framework for the coupled geochemical and hydrologic responses observed experimentally, we have calibrated a reactive transport model at the core scale using the TOUGHREACT simulator [1]. [1] Xu et al. (2011) Comput. Geosci.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86594", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86596" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"A21E-0185: Probabilistic Predictions and Downscaling with an Analog Ensemble for Weather, Renewable Energy, Air Quality, and Hurricane Intensity", "abstract":"The analog of a forecast for a given location and time is defined as the observation that corresponds to a past prediction matching selected features of the current forecast. The best analogs form the analog ensemble (AnEn). First AnEn skill is analyzed for predictions of 10-m wind speed and 2-m temperature. We show that AnEn produces accurate predictions and a reliable quantification of their uncertainty with similar or superior skill compared to cutting-edge methods, while requiring considerably less computational resources. A preliminary example of an application of AnEn in 3D will also be shown.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86596", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86597" } }
{"authors":"Rachel Storer::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Graeme Stephens::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Susan van den Heever::Colorado State University--", "title":"A51M-0260: Investigating Links Between Convective Precipitation, Detrainment, and the Large Scale Water Budget", "abstract":"While the importance of deep convection to the large-scale circulation and water budget has long been understood, much of these contributions have yet to be well quantified. Direct observations of detrainment are difficult to acquire, preventing the link between the deep convective and large scale water budgets necessary to close both. A long-standing issue with climate models is the overproduction of convective precipitation. This then affects the large scale circulation through direct links to detrainment, which provides moisture to large scale clouds. Future climate simulations have suggested that convective precipitation may increase in a warmer climate, but it is unknown whether this effect may be mitigated or exacerbated with a better representation of convective precipition and detrainment in these models. With cloud resolving model simulations of deep convection, we quantify the water budgets and the links between convective precipitation, convective detrainment, and the large scale. Examining the behavior of deep convective clouds in varying environments can help to constrain these processes in climate models and provide some clue to how convection may change in a warming climate.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86597", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86598" } }
{"authors":"Kimberly Hill::University of Minnesota--Anthony Longjas::St. Anthony Falls Laboratory--Delaney Moberly::University of Minnesota Twin Cities--", "title":"EP51D-03: Experimental Investigation of Entrainment Rate by Debris Flows: from Shear Stress to Granular Temperature", "abstract":"Debris flows – flows of boulders, gravel, sand, fine particles, and fluids – erode sediment from steep hillsides and deposit them at lower slopes. Current model frameworks for erosion by debris flow vary significantly and include those that consider macroscopic fields such as excess shear stresses, similar to traditional models of bedload transport, to those that consider the “granular” physics, from force chains (related to bed fabric) to granular temperatures (related to random kinetic energy of the flow). We perform experiments to investigate the underlying mechanics associated with entrainment of bed materials by overlying flows in an instrumented laboratory debris flow flume. In particular, we investigate how the erosion rate of a flowing mass impinging on an erodible bed of particles depends on boundary conditions, dynamics of the flow, and the state of the bed. Using high speed imaging to capture average and instantaneous particle dynamics simultaneously with bed stress measurements, we investigate the effectiveness of a variety of model frameworks for capturing the relationships between flow dynamics and erosion rates. We find no correlation between the bed shear stress associated with the mass of the flow and erosion rate. Similarly, we found no correlation between the erosion rate and a Reynolds stress, that is, the stress associated with correlations between downstream and vertical velocity fluctuations. On the other hand, we found that granular temperature is well-correlated with entrainment rate during particular phases of our experimental debris flow. In particular, we found the instantaneous entrainment rate ε is linearly dependent on the ratio of the granular temperature Tg to the kinetic energy associated with the average flow velocity u: ε ~ (Tg / ρm u2) where ρm is the local instantaneous density of the flow. We present these results and discuss how they vary with the state of the flow, boundary conditions, and particle mixtures.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86598", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86599" } }
{"authors":"Phil Cummins::Australian National University--MD Jakir Hossen::Australian National University--Jan Dettmer::Australian National University--Toshitaka Baba::University of Tokushima--", "title":"NH13E-08: Tsunami waveform inversion for sea surface displacement following the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake: Importance of dispersion and variable rupture velocity", "abstract":"This presentation considers the importance of model parametrization, including dispersion, source kinematics and source discretization, in tsunami source inversion. We implement single and multiple time window methods for dispersive and non-dispersive wave propagation to estimate source models for the tsunami generated by the 2011 Tohoku-oki earthquake. Our source model is described by sea surface displacement instead of fault slip, since sea surface displacement accounts for various tsunami generation mechanisms in addition to fault slip. The results show that tsunami source models can strongly depend on such model choices, particularly when high-quality, open-ocean tsunami waveform data are available. We carry out several synthetic inversion tests to validate the method and assess the impact of parametrization including dispersion and variable rupture velocity in data predictions on the inversion results. Although each of these effects have been considered separately in previous studies, we show that it is important to consider them together in order to obtain more meaningful inversion results. Our results suggest that the discretization of the source, the use of dispersive waves, and accounting for source kinematics are all important factors in tsunami source inversion of large events such as the Tohoku-oki earthquake, particularly when an extensive set of high quality tsunami waveform recordings are available. For the Tohoku event, a dispersive model with variable rupture velocity results in a profound improvement in waveform fits that justify the higher source complexity and provide a more realistic source model.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86599", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86600" } }
{"authors":"Zong-Liang Yang::Univ Texas Austin--Yongfei Zhang::University of Texas at Austin--Yonghwan Kwon::University of Texas at Austin--Peirong Lin::University of Texas at Austin--Long Zhao::University of Texas at Austin--Timothy Hoar::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Jeffrey Anderson::University Corporation for Atmospheric Research--Ally Toure::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Matthew Rodell::NASA/GSFC--", "title":"H53L-08: An Extensible Global Land Data Assimilation System Based on NCAR's Community Land Model (CLM) and Data Assimilation Research Testbed", "abstract":"Land plays an important role in shaping regional and global climate and the water cycle. However, many of these processes are not well understood, which is largely due to the lack of high quality datasets. Over the past 5 years, we have developed a global-scale multi-sensor snow data assimilation system based on NCAR’s Data Assimilation Research Testbed (DART) coupled to the Community Land Model version 4 (CLM4); CLM4 can be replaced by CLM4.5 or the latest versions as they become available. This data assimilation system can be applied to all land areas to take advantage of high-resolution regional-specific observations. The DART data assimilation system has an unprecedented large ensemble (80-member) atmospheric forcing (temperature, precipitation, winds, humidity, radiation) with a quality of typical reanalysis products, which not only facilitates ensemble land data assimilation, but also allows a comprehensive study of many feedback processes (e.g. the snow albedo feedback and soil moisture–precipitation feedback). While initial findings were reported in the past AGU, AMS and GEWEX meetings, this paper will present comprehensive results from the CLM/DART with assimilating MODIS (Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer) snow cover fraction and GRACE (Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment) terrestrial water storage. Besides our prototype snow data assimilation, the coupled CLM4/DART framework is useful for data assimilation involving other variables, such as soil moisture, skin temperature, and leaf area index from various satellite sources and ground observations. Such a truly multi-mission, multi-platform, multi-sensor, and multi-scale data assimilation system with DART will, ultimately, help constrain earth system models using all kinds of observations to improve their prediction skills from intraseasonal to interannual. Some preliminary results from using our snow data assimilation output in seasonal climate prediction will be presented as well.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86600", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86601" } }
{"authors":"Omar Amador-Muñoz::University of California Berkeley--Haofei Zhang::University of California Berkeley--Pawel Misztal::University of California Berkeley--Dave Worton::NPL Management Ltd--Greg Drozd::University of California Berkeley--Allen Goldstein::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"A11M-0256: Tracking Gas Phase Composition in Oil evaporation and Oxidation Experiments", "abstract":"Primary Organic Aerosol (POA) is emitted directly by anthropogenic or natural sources, whereas Secondary Organic Aerosol (SOA) is formed in the atmosphere through chemical reactions that result from conversion of more volatile species into lower volatility oxidized products and their subsequent condensation to the particulate phase. We studied SOA formation from evaporation of Macondo crude oil (MC 252) using a wind tunnel coupled to a flow tube oxidation reactor. Ozone, UV lights, and water vapor were used to make OH radicals. Organic compounds in the gas phase, both those evaporated from the wind tunnel and those formed in the flow tube oxidation experiments, were monitored using proton-transfer-reaction mass spectrometry (PTR-qMS and PTR-TOF-MS). We observed approximately 400 different species. Compounds with less than C10 were mostly evaporated in the first 5 hours when maximum SOA formation was also obtained. Hydrocarbons with carbon number (11-14) were still present in the oil after 12 h of continuous evaporation at wind speed of 2 m s-1. We will show the implications of these results for the production of SOA related to the range of evaporated chemical size and reactivity.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86601", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86604" } }
{"authors":"Branislav Notaros::Colorado State University--Viswanathan Bringi::Colorado State University--Andrew Newman::University Corporation for Atmospheric Research--Cameron Kleinkort::Colorado State University--Gwo-Jong Huang::Colorado State University--Patrick Kennedy::Colorado State University--Merhala Thurai::Colorado State University--", "title":"A11A-0010: Accurate Characterization of Winter Precipitation Using In-Situ Instrumentation, CSU-CHILL Radar, and Advanced Scattering Methods", "abstract":"We present a novel approach to remote sensing and characterization of winter precipitation and modeling of radar observables through a synergistic use of advanced in-situ instrumentation for microphysical and geometrical measurements of ice and snow particles, image processing methodology to reconstruct complex particle three-dimensional (3D) shapes, computational electromagnetics to analyze realistic precipitation scattering, and state-of-the-art polarimetric radar. Our in-situ measurement site at the Easton Valley View Airport, La Salle, Colorado, shown in the figure, consists of two advanced optical imaging disdrometers within a 2/3-scaled double fence intercomparison reference wind shield, and also includes PLUVIO snow measuring gauge, VAISALA weather station, and collocated NCAR GPS advanced upper-air system sounding system. Our primary radar is the CSU-CHILL radar, with a dual-offset Gregorian antenna featuring very high polarization purity and excellent side-lobe performance in any plane, and the in-situ instrumentation site being very conveniently located at a range of 12.92 km from the radar. A multi-angle snowflake camera (MASC) is used to capture multiple different high-resolution views of an ice particle in free-fall, along with its fall speed. We apply a visual hull geometrical method for reconstruction of 3D shapes of particles based on the images collected by the MASC, and convert these shapes into models for computational electromagnetic scattering analysis, using a higher order method of moments. A two-dimensional video disdrometer (2DVD), collocated with the MASC, provides 2D contours of a hydrometeor, along with the fall speed and other important parameters. We use the fall speed from the MASC and the 2DVD, along with state parameters measured at the Easton site, to estimate the particle mass (Böhm’s method), and then the dielectric constant of particles, based on a Maxwell-Garnet formula. By calculation of the “particle-by-particle” scattering matrices over large time intervals using the in-situ measured data, we obtain, simultaneously, all polarimetric radar observables, which are then compared and analyzed against measurements by the CHILL Radar. We present and discuss results from several interesting events observed during the 2014/2015 winter campaign.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86604", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86606" } }
{"authors":"Anthea Coster::MIT Haystack Observatory--Evan Thomas::Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University--Juha Vierinen::MIT Haystack Observatory--William Rideout::MIT Haystack Observatory--", "title":"SA42A-07: Fine Scale Structure observed in the Total Electron Content above the Sub-Auroral, Auroral, and Polar Ionosphere", "abstract":"This paper details recent improvements in TEC observations made in the sub-auroral, auroral, and polar regions. The goal is high-resolution measurements of both medium and fine-scale TEC-gradients. To achieve this, the number of GNSS receivers processed was more than doubled, due to agreements made with multiple government and commercial agencies, such as those involved with highway transportation and precision farming. Following the increase in GNSS observations, additional improvements were made in the MIT Haystack GNSS data processing algorithms, allowing for finer grid spacing of the output TEC data. Merging data sets also increased sensitivity. Scintillation data from several GNSS receivers have been overlaid on top of all-sky camera images showing evidence of aurora. These data sets have been merged with the measured background TEC to monitor the development both medium and fine-scale TEC gradients. Data from multiple geomagnetic storms and auroral events in this solar cycle will be presented.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86606", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86607" } }
{"authors":"Shelley Olds::UNAVCO, Inc. Boulder University of Nebraska Lincoln--", "title":"NH13A-1916: How Can Museum Exhibits Enhance Earthquake and Tsunami Hazard Resiliency?", "abstract":"Creating a natural disaster-ready community requires interoperating scientific, technical, and social systems. In addition to the technical elements that need to be in place, communities and individuals need to be prepared to react when a natural hazard event occurs. Natural hazard awareness and preparedness training and education often takes place through informal learning at science centers and formal k-12 education programs as well as through awareness raising via strategically placed informational tsunami warning signs and placards. Museums and science centers are influential in raising science literacy within a community, however can science centers enhance earthquake and tsunami resiliency by providing hazard science content and preparedness exhibits? Museum docents and informal educators are uniquely situated within the community. They are transmitters and translators of science information to broad audiences. Through interaction with the public, docents are well positioned to be informants of the knowledge beliefs, and feelings of science center visitors. They themselves are life-long learners, both constantly learning from the museum content around them and sharing this content with visitors. They are also members of a community where they live. In-depth interviews with museum informal educators and docents were conducted at a science center in coastal Pacific Northwest. This region has a potential to be struck by a great 9+ Mw earthquake and subsequent tsunami. During the interviews, docents described how they applied learning from natural hazard exhibits at a science visitor center to their daily lives. During the individual interviews, the museum docents described their awareness (knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors) of natural hazards where they live and work, the feelings evoked as they learned about their hazard vulnerability, the extent to which they applied this learning and awareness to their lives, such as creating an evacuation plan, whether their behaviors changed as a result of learning about earthquakes and tsunamis, and other related questions. In this presentation, results from this qualitative study will be shared along with future research this is planned to explore the issue of community and individual resiliency further.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86607", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86608" } }
{"authors":"Amber Soja::NASA Langley Research Center--Nadezhda Tchebakova::V.N.Sukachev Institute of Forest SB RAS--Elena Parfenova::V.N.Sukachev Institute of Forest SB RAS--Alan Cantin::Canadian Forest Service--Susan Conard::Rocky Mountain Research Station Missoula--", "title":"GC31B-1172: Projected Impacts of 21st Century Climate Change on Potential Habitat for Vegetation and Forest Types in Russia", "abstract":"Global GCMs have demonstrated profound potential for projections to affect the distribution of terrestrial ecosystems and individual species at all hierarchical levels. We modeled progression of potential Russian ecotones and forest-forming species as the climate changes. Large-scale bioclimatic models were developed to predict Russian zonal vegetation (RuBCliM) and forest types (ForCliM) from three bioclimatic indices (1) growing degree-days above 5 degrees C; (2) negative degree-days below 0 C ; and (3) an annual moisture index (ratio of growing degree days to annual precipitation). The presence or absence of continuous permafrost was explicitly included in the models as limiting the forests and tree species distribution. All simulations to predict vegetation change across Russia were run by coupling our bioclimatic models with bioclimatic indices and the permafrost distribution for the baseline period and for the future 2020, 2050 and 2100 simulated by 3 GCMs (CGCM3.1, HadCM3 and IPSLCM4) and 3 climate change scenarios (A1B, A2 and B1). Under these climate scenarios, it is projected the zonobiomes will shift far northward to reach equilibrium with the change in climate. Under the warmer and drier projected future climate, about half of Russia would be suitable for the forest-steppe ecotone and grasslands, rather than for forests. Water stress tolerant light-needled taiga would have an increased advantage over water-loving dark-needled taiga. Permafrost-tolerant L. dahurica taiga would remain the dominant forest across permafrost. Increases in severe fire weather would lead to increases in large, high-severity fires, especially at boundaries between forest ecotones, which can be expected to facilitate a more rapid progression of vegetation towards a new equilibrium with the climate. Adaptation to climate change may be facilitated by: assisting migration of forests by seed transfers to establish genotypes that may be more ecologically suited as climate changes; and the introduction of suitable agricultural crops that may be potentially adapted to a warmer climate in the expected steppe and forest-steppe.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86608", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86609" } }
{"authors":"Bhanu Pratap::Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology--", "title":"C33E-0866: Sensitivity of annual mass balance gradient and Hypsometry to the changing climate: the case of Dokriani Glacier, central Himalaya, India", "abstract":"The glacier mass balance is undelayed, unfiltered and direct method to assess the impact of climate change on the glaciers. Many studies suggest that some of the Himalayan glaciers have lost their mass at an increased rate during the past few decades. Furthermore, the mass balance gradient and hypsometric analysis are important to understand the glacier response towards climatic perturbations. Our long term in-situ monitoring on the Dokriani Glacier provides great insights to understand the variability in central Himalayan glaciers. We report the relationship between glacier hypsometry and annual mass balance gradient (12 years) to understand the glacier’s response towards climate change. Dokriani Glacier in the Bhagirathi basin is a small (7 km2) NNW exposed glacier in the western part of central Himalaya, India. The study analysed the annual balance, mass balance gradient and length changes observed during first decade of 21st century (2007-2013) and compare with the previous observations of 1990s (1992-2000). A large spatial variability in the mass balance gradients of two different periods has been observed. The equilibrium–line altitude (ELA) was fluctuated between 5000 and 5100 m a.s.l. and the derived time averaged ELA (ELAn) and balance budget ELA (ELA0) were 5075 and 4965 m a.s.l respectively during 1992-2013. The observed time-averaged accumulation-area ratio (AARn) and balance budget AAR (AAR0) were 0.67 and 0.72 respectively during 1992-2013. The higher value of AAR comprises due to flat and broader accumulation area (4.50 km2) of the glacier. Although, having larger accumulation area, the glacier has faced strong mass wasting with average annual ablation of -1.82 m w.e. a-1 in the ablation zone as compare to residual average annual accumulation of 0.41 m w.e. a-1. Based on the annual mass balance series (12 years) Dokriani Glacier has continuous negative annual balances with monotonically negative cumulative mass loss of -3.86 m w.e with the average loss of -0.32 m w.e a-1. Dokriani Glacier also showed continues recession from 1992 to present. Snout was ascended 95 m a.s.l. from an elevation of 3870 m a.s.l. in 1992 to an elevation of 3965 m a.s.l. in 2013. The progressive retreat of the glacier affects its extension and volume and covered by continuous enhancement of debris in the lower ablation zone.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86609", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86610" } }
{"authors":"Denise Burchsted::Keene State College--", "title":"EP43B-0970: Ecosystem State as Assessed by Water Temperature: A Guide to Restoring River Patchiness", "abstract":"River restoration projects commonly idealize the free-flowing state, despite the fundamental understanding that rivers are patchy systems. This talk presents temperature data from rivers in the northeastern U.S. to further demonstrate the nature of this patchiness and to suggest that a better restoration target would be ecosystem heterogeneity. These temperature data were collected at 15-minute intervals using 27 onset water temperature pro v2 loggers in Hubbard Brook, in central New Hampshire, and Pisgah State Park and Hosley Brook, in southwestern New Hampshire, all of which are in watersheds without direct modern human influence. These loggers captured the temperature of the river water entering, leaving, and within nine beaver ponds. Analysis of these data show many different aspects of the patchiness of these ecosystems. The range of temperatures recorded in the free-flowing reaches—across a day, season, or year—is significantly more constrained than in the beaver ponds, some of which have higher highs and others of which have lower lows. The onset of warming in the springtime shows a similar significantly tighter grouping for the free-flowing reaches, with both earlier and later warming dates within the beaver ponds. Spectral analysis shows a cluster of similar signatures for the free-flowing reaches, with a peak at the 24-hour period. In contrast, some beaver ponds show additional peaks at 6-hour and 4-hour periods, demonstrating variability of flow paths. Despite these significant differences, the temperature signatures of the beaver ponds are quickly lost downstream, where the temperature regimes upstream and downstream of the ponds are nearly indistinguishable. These temperature data demonstrate that these ponds create water conditions considered unsuitable for target species of river restoration; this talk will also present data from a companion study showing dissolved oxygen and nitrogen concentrations also in excess of river management regulations. Because these conditions quickly resolve downstream, and because these areas are known as hotspots for desired aquatic species, these data demonstrate the importance of patchiness rather than a single desired restoration target.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86610", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86611" } }
{"authors":"Rosaleen March::Texas A & M University College Station--Georgianne Moore::Texas A & M University College Station--Christopher Edgar::Texas A&M Forest Service--A. Lawing::Texas A & M University College Station--Robert Washington-Allen::University of Tennessee--", "title":"GC31G-02: The relative contribution of climatic, edaphic, and biotic drivers to risk of tree mortality from drought", "abstract":"In recorded history, the 2011 Texas Drought was comparable in severity only to a drought that occurred 300 years ago. By mid-September, 88% of the state experienced 'exceptional' conditions, with the rest experiencing 'extreme' or 'severe' drought. By recent estimates, the 2011 Texas Drought killed 6.2% of all the state's trees, at a rate nearly 9 times greater than average. The vast spatial scale and relatively uniform intensity of this drought has provided an opportunity to examine the comparative interactions among forest types, terrain, and edaphic factors across major climate gradients which in 2011 were subjected to extreme drought conditions that ultimately caused massive tree mortality. We used maximum entropy modeling (Maxent) to rank environmental landscape factors with the potential to drive drought-related tree mortality and test the assumption that the relative importance of these factors are scale-dependent. Occurrence data of dead trees were collected during the summer of 2012 from 599 field plots distributed across Texas with 30% used for model evaluation. Bioclimatic variables, ecoregions, soils characteristics, and topographic variables were modeled with drought-killed tree occurrence. Their relative contribution to the model was seen as their relative importance in driving mortality. To test determinants at a more local scale, we examined Landsat 7 scenes in East and West Texas with moderate-resolution data for the same variables above with the exception of climate. All models were significantly better than random in binomial tests of omission and receiver operating characteristic analyses. The modeled spatial distribution of probability of occurrence showed high probability of mortality in the east-central oak woodlands and the mixed pine-hardwood forest region in northeast Texas. Both regional and local models were dominated by biotic factors (ecoregion and forest type, respectively). Forest density and precipitation of driest month also contributed highly to the regional model. The local models gave more importance to available water storage at root zone and hillshade. Understanding how environmental factors drive drought-related mortality can help predict vulnerable landscapes and aid in preparing for future drought events.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86611", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86612" } }
{"authors":"Erdinc Saygin::Australian National University--Andreas Fichtner::ETH Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich--Phil Cummins::Australian National University--Masturyono Masturyono::Indonesian Agency for Meteorology, Climatology and Geophysics--", "title":"S23C-2721: Seismic Structure of Southeast Asia from Full Waveform Seismic Ambient Noise Tomography", "abstract":"We image the lower crust and upper-mantle structure of Southeast Asia with a 3D full waveform adjoint inversion scheme by directly inverting Green's functions retrieved from interstation seismic noise correlations. Synthetic Green's functions are computed at a period range between 10 and 40 s to simulate the wave propagation in the region. Misfits between observed and synthetic waveforms are reduced by iteratively updating model parameters using sensitivity kernels with a conjugate-gradient optimization method. The final model is verified via comparing the simulated waveforms with the recorded earthquakes in the region. The balanced coverage of rays in the region enabled us to image complex structure. The Australian plate is characterized with higher velocities for most of the crust, where most of Indonesia, and its surroundings show complex structure with low velocities. The transition from the oceanic part of the Australian Plate to the continental crust adjacent to the Banda Arc is clearly imaged.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86612", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86613" } }
{"authors":"Jai Singh::cbec eco engineering--Martin Doyle::Duke University--Rebecca Lave::Indiana University Bloomington--Morgan Robertson::University of Wisconsin Madison--", "title":"EP43B-0987: The Morphology of Streams Restored for Market and Nonmarket Purposes: Insights From a Mixed Natural-Social Science Approach", "abstract":"Stream restoration is increasingly driven by compensatory mitigation; impacts to streams associated with typical land development activities must be offset via restoration of streams elsewhere. This policy creates an environment where restored stream ‘credits’ are traded under market-like conditions, comparable to wetland mitigation, carbon offsets, or endangered species habitat banking. The effect of mitigation on restoration design and construction is unknown. We use geomorphic surveys to quantify the differences between restored and nonrestored streams, and the difference between streams restored for market purposes (compensatory mitigation) from those restored for nonmarket programs. Physical study sites are located in the state of North Carolina, USA. We also analyze the social and political-economic drivers of the stream restoration and mitigation industry using analysis of policy documents and interviews with key personnel including regulators, mitigation bankers, stream designers, and scientists. Restored streams are typically wider, shallower and geomorphically more homogeneous than nonrestored streams. For example, nonrestored streams are typically characterized by more than an order of magnitude variability in radius of curvature and meander wavelength within a single study reach. By contrast, the radius of curvature in many restored streams does not vary for nearly the entire project reach. Streams restored for the mitigation market are typically headwater streams and part of a large, complex of long restored main channels, and many restored tributaries; streams restored for nonmarket purposes are typically shorter and consist of the main channel only. Interviews reveal that social forces shape the morphology of restored streams. Designers integrate many influences including economic and regulatory constraints, but traditions of practice have a large influence as well. Home to a fairly mature stream mitigation banking market, North Carolina can provide lessons for other states or countries with younger mitigation banking programs (e.g., Oregon and Montana) as well as places considering their introduction.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86613", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86614" } }
{"authors":"James Hansen::Columbia University of New York--", "title":"U13A-01: Scientific Reticence and Sea Level Rise (Invited Talk)", "abstract":"Caution is an essential ingredient in scientific investigations, as success in science depends on objective skepticism. In some cases a cultural resistance to scientific discovery has seemed to exist and there are other factors that can contribute to scientific reticence. In a case such as ice sheet instability and sea level rise there is a danger that excessive caution might serve to lock in future disasters. I discussed these issues almost a decade ago (in Environ. Res. Lett., 2, 024002, 2007, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/2/2/024002), but given all that has transpired since then, this topic has become even more relevant and urgent. I will discuss the status of this dilemma as I see it.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86614", "section":"Union"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86615" } }
{"authors":"Lesley Wyborn::Australian National University--Ben Evans::Australian National University--Claire Trenham::Australian National University--Kelsey Druken::Australian National University--Jingbo Wang::Australian National University--", "title":"PA53A-2238: THE Interoperability Challenge for the Geosciences: Stepping up from Interoperability between Disciplinary Siloes to Creating Transdisciplinary Data Platforms.", "abstract":"The National Computational Infrastructure (NCI) at the Australian National University (ANU) has collocated over 10 PB of national and international data assets within a HPC facility to create the National Environmental Research Data Interoperability Platform (NERDIP). The data span a wide range of fields from the earth systems and environment (climate, coasts, oceans, and geophysics) through to astronomy, bioinformatics, and the social sciences. These diverse data collections are collocated on a major data storage node that is linked to a Petascale HPC and Cloud facility. Users can search across all of the collections and either log in and access the data directly, or they can access the data via standards-based web services. These collocated petascale data collections are theoretically a massive resource for interdisciplinary science at scales and resolutions never hitherto possible. But once collocated, multiple barriers became apparent that make cross-domain data integration very difficult and often so time consuming, that either less ambitious research goals are attempted or the project is abandoned. Incompatible content is only one half of the problem: other showstoppers are differing access models, licences and issues of ownership of derived products. Brokers can enable interdisciplinary research but in reality are we just delaying the inevitable? A call to action is required adopt a transdiciplinary approach at the conception of development of new multi-disciplinary systems whereby those across all the scientific domains, the humanities, social sciences and beyond work together to create a unity of informatics plaforms that interoperate horizontally across the multiple discipline boundaries, and also operate vertically to enable a diversity of people to access data from high end researchers, to undergraduate, school students and the general public. Once we master such a transdisciplinary approach to our vast global information assets, we will then achieve THE interoperability challenge for the geosciences and made geoscience data and information accessible to all domains and to all peoples.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86615", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86616" } }
{"authors":"Jennifer Fehrenbacher::University of California Davis--Ann Russell::University of California Davis--Catherine Davis::University of California Davis--Howard Spero::University of California Davis--Edward Chu::University of California Davis--", "title":"PP51D-02: Experimental determination of the partition coefficient for Ba in Neogloboquadrina dutertrei suggests calcification occurs in a Ba-enriched microenvironment", "abstract":"The Ba/Ca ratio in several spinose planktic foraminifer species varies as a function of the Ba/Ca concentration of seawater and is not affected by other parameters such as the seawater salinity, temperature and pH (Honisch et al., 2011). Since seawater Ba concentration is linearly related to Ba in nearshore environments, Ba/Ca ratios in spinose species shows promise as an indicator of past changes in monsoon strength and river runoff (e. g. Weldeab et al. 2007). In contrast, the non-spinose foraminifers often have intrashell variability in Ba/Ca, with Ba/Ca ratios much higher than expected for the range of Ba concentrations observed in the ocean. Furthermore, the Ba/Ca ratio can vary by over a factor of 10 within a single specimen. This suggests either 1) the partition coefficient for Ba in non-spinose species differs from that determined for spinose species, or 2) non-spinose species calcify in a micro-environment that is enriched in Ba. We conducted experiments on live specimens to determine the partition coefficient for Ba in the non-spinose foraminifer N. dutertrei. Specimens were collected via plankton net from the Southern California Bight and cultured at the Wrigley Marine Science Center, Santa Catalina Island during the summer of 2013-2015. We use isotopically labeled seawater (87Sr) to identify discrete portions of calcite that grew in culture. We use laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) for trace element analyses and to identify ocean grown vs. culture grown calcite. We show that the partition coefficient is similar to the spinose species: N. dutertrei incorporates Ba as a function of seawater chemistry. We conclude from these observations that N. dutertrei forms its calcite from fluids enriched in Ba, and hypothesize that this process occurs via attachment to organic-rich particles such as marine snow.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86616", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86617" } }
{"authors":"Alfonso Mejia::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--Ikechukwu Ahams::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--Willa Paterson::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--", "title":"H13D-1569: Virtual Water Transfers in U.S. Cities from Domestic Commodity Flows", "abstract":"Cities have imported water into their boundaries for centuries but understanding how cities indirectly affect watersheds through the commodities which they import is fairly unknown. Thus, we present and discuss here a methodology for determining the virtual water transfers to and from U.S. cities associated with domestic commodity flows. For our methodology, we only consider agricultural and industrial commodities and, to represent the commodity flows, we use the Freight Analysis Framework (FAF) dataset from the U.S. Department of Transportation. Accordingly, we determine virtual water transfers for the 123 geographic regions in the FAF, which consists of 17 states, 73 metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs), and 33 remainders of states. Out of the 41 sectors that comprise the FAF data, we consider only the 29 sectors that account for the agricultural and industrial commodities. Using both water use data for macro-sectors and national water use coefficients for different industries, we determine a weighted water use coefficient for each of the 29 sectors considered. Ultimately, we use these weighted coefficients to estimate virtual water transfers and the water footprint for each city. Preliminary comparisons with other water footprint estimates indicate that our methodology yields reasonable results. In terms of the water footprint, we find that cities (i.e. MSAs) are net consumers, can consume a large proportion of their own production, and can have a large agricultural production. We also find that the per capita water footprint of industrial consumption decreases with increasing population in cities, suggesting that large cities may be more efficient.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86617", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86618" } }
{"authors":"Fabio Vargas::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Gary Swenson::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--", "title":"SA13A-2318: Measurement of Gravity Wave Forcing over the Andes Lidar Observatory (30.3ºS)", "abstract":"A number of investigators have presented measurements of the orientation of gravity waves disturbing the nightlow layers. In this paper, we present a global view of the gravity wave orientation reported in the past decade and point out the meridional preferential orientation of the waves toward the summer pole. We discuss the probable causes of such directionality, and also show estimations of dissipating wave forcing on the meridional flow based in airglow imagery and meteor radar measurements.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86618", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86619" } }
{"authors":"Ahmad Abrishamchi::Sharif University of Technology--Amir Mirshahi::Sharif University of Technology--", "title":"H21B-1354: Monitoring Rainfall by Combining Ground-based Observed Precipitation and PERSIANN Satellite Product (Case Study Area: Lake Urmia Basin)", "abstract":"The global coverage, quick access, and appropriate spatial-temporal resolution of satellite precipitation data renders the data appropriate for hydrologic studies, especially in regions with no sufficient rain-gauge network. On the other hand, satellite precipitation products may have major errors. The present study aims at reduction of estimation error of the PERSIANN satellite precipitation product. Bayesian logic employed to develop a statistical relationship between historical ground-based and satellite precipitation data. This relationship can then be used to reduce satellite precipitation product error in near real time, when there is no ground-based precipitation observation. The method was evaluated in the Lake Urmia basin with a monthly time scale; November to May of 2000- 2008 for the purpose of model development and two years of 2009 and 2010 for the validation of the established relationships. Moreover, Kriging interpolation method was employed to estimate the average rainfall in the basin. Furthermore, to downscale the satellite precipitation product from 0.25o to 0.05o, data-location downscaling algorithm was used. In 76 percent of months, the final product, compared with the satellite precipitation, had less error during the validation period. Additionally, its performance was marginally better than adjusted PERSIANN product.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86619", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86620" } }
{"authors":"Da Yang::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"A13A-0289: Convection, Waves, and Double ITCZs—An Angular Momentum Perspective", "abstract":"Here I propose that enhanced equatorial wave activities lead to the double ITCZ rainfall pattern by modulating the atmospheric angular momentum budget. Convectively coupled equatorial waves can transport angular momentum to the equator, and this momentum convergence accelerates the zonal flow. As a result, anomalous equatorward flows in the upper troposphere are induced to balance this acceleration. The air mass converges and descends at the equator. Deep convection is therefore suppressed. Near the surface, the air mass moves away from the equator, and then converges and ascends at higher latitudes. If the convectively coupled waves are strong enough, this anomalous circulation can give rise to double ITCZs. In this presentation, I will first focus on a case study during March 2015. During this period, the strongest MJO event on record occurred, and equatorial wave activities were enhanced. The double ITCZs also emerged during the same period over the western and central Pacific. I calculate the momentum budget in the tropical atmosphere by decomposing the zonal wind into the zonal mean, stationary eddies, and transient eddies. Our results suggest that transient eddies play an important role in forming double ITCZs. Long-term statistics by using the reanalysis data and results from GCM simulations will also be presented.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86620", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86621" } }
{"authors":"Sean Birkel::University of Maine--Erich Osterberg::Dartmouth College--Karl Kreutz::University of Maine--Cameron Wake::University of New Hampshire Main Campus--Seth Campbell::University of Maine--Dominic Winski::Dartmouth College--", "title":"PP33A-2272: Using Reanalysis to Provide Circulation Context for Ice Cores Recovered from Mt. Hunter Plateau in Denali National Park", "abstract":"Researchers from the University of Maine, University of New Hampshire, and Dartmouth College supported by NSF recently recovered two ice cores from the Mt. Hunter Plateau in the Alaska Range of Denali National Park. Ongoing analyses of snow accumulation, snowmelt, stable isotopes, and chemistry within the core are providing proxy information for ~1000 years of regional climate variability. Broader context to link circulation across the North Pacific and western North America can be obtained by using climate reanalysis. In this vein, we are using monthly, daily, and sub-daily meteorological fields from the NCEP Climate Forecasting System Reanalysis (CFSR) to characterize large-scale circulation associated with notable events in the ice core record onward from 1979. One goal is to assess the relationship between annual snow accumulation spikes and storm frequency and magnitude. A second goal is to relate these observations to events during the Little Ice Age and Medieval Warm Period. Work is in progress, and results will be presented at the fall meeting.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86621", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86622" } }
{"authors":"Brady Flinchum::University of Wyoming--W Steven Holbrook::University of Wyoming--Dario Grana::University of Wyoming--Andrew Parsekian::University of Wyoming--", "title":"H11A-1320: Exploring Critical Assumptions of Petrophysical Models in Fractured Aquifers by Comparing Estimated Porosity Values Obtained from Surface Nuclear Magnetic Resonance and Shallow Seismic Refraction Surveys.", "abstract":"Estimating subsurface porosity from most near-surface geophysical techniques relies on petrophysical relationships. Using petrophysical relationships are challenging because they require many assumptions and oftentimes require site-specific constants. Despite complexities and challenges, the petrophysical relationships are critical to convert the measurable physical properties into hydrologic properties such as porosity, water content and ultimately hydraulic conductivity. In this study we compare porosities derived from shallow seismic refraction (SSR) and surface nuclear magnetic resonance (SNMR) in a fractured granite aquifer in the Laramie Range, Wyoming. To estimate porosity from the SSR data we use a Bayesian inversion based on Hertz-Mindlin contact theory and Hashin- Strickman boundaries. This type of petrophysical model requires us to make assumptions about the grain structure, mineralogy and water content. Using water table measurements from a borehole we assume that all pores are fully saturated below 10 meters, thus the SNMR measurement provides an estimate of porosity. If the petrophysical model and the assumptions that are required to use it were correct and the SNMR measurements were perfect, the estimates of porosities derived from two distinct physical measurements should provide the same porosity. Interestingly, we observe a large discrepancy in the porosities derived from this unique combination of measurements. At depths of 10 to 20 meters, the area that we interpret as fractured bedrock and where the assumption of fully saturated pores holds, the SSR predicted porosities are 15 to 20 % higher than those predicted by SNMR. Previous comparisons of the Bayesian inversion have shown it does well to predict porosity within the saprolite. The large discrepancy illustrates the need to use separate petrophysical models in the weathered and fractured zones of granite aquifers. More research is needed to figure out how to combine different petrophysical models that fulfill assumptions that fit conditions observed in the subsurface.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86622", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86623" } }
{"authors":"Shigeto Watanabe::Hokkaido University--Takumi Abe::Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency--Hiroto Habu::Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency--Yoshihiro Kakinami::Kochi University of Technology--Miguel Larsen::Clemson University--Robert Pfaff::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Mamoru Yamamoto::Kyoto University--Masayuki Yamamoto::Kyoto University--", "title":"SA22A-08: Neutral Wind Observations below 200 km altitudes", "abstract":"Neutral Wind Observations below 200 km altitudes S. Watanabe1, T. Abe2, H. Habu2, Y. Kakinami3, M. Larsen4, R. Pfaff5, M. Yamamoto6, M-Y. Yamamoto3 1Hokkaido University/Hokkaido Information University, 2JAXA/ISAS, 3Kochi University of Technology, 4Clemson University, 5NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center, 6Kyoto University, Neutral wind in the thermosphere is one of the key parameters to understand the ionosphere-thermosphere coupling process. JAXA/ISAS successfully launched sounding rockets from Uchinoura Space Center (USC) on September 2, 2007, January 12, 2012, and July 20, 2013, and NASA launched sounding rockets from Kwajalein on May 7, 2013 and from Wallops on July 4, 2013. The rockets installed Lithium and/or TMA canisters as well as instruments for plasma and electric and magnetic fields. The atomic Lithium gases were released at altitudes between 150 km and 300 km in the evening on September 2, 2007, at altitude of ~100 km in the morning on January 12, 2012, at altitude of ~120km in the midnight on July 20, 2013, at altitude between 150 km and 300 km in the evening on May 7, 2013 and at altitude of ~150 km in the noon on July 4, 2013. The Lithium atoms were scattering sunlight by resonance scattering with wavelength of 670nm. However, the Lithium atoms scattered moon light on July 20, 2013. The moon light scattering is the first time to use for thermospheric wind measurement in the midnight. The Lithium clouds/trails and TMA trails showed clearly the neutral wind shears and atmospheric waves at ~150 km altitude in the lower thermosphere for all local time.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86623", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86624" } }
{"authors":"Noah Molotch::University of Colorado at Boulder--Ernesto Trujillo::Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne--", "title":"H12B-01: Snowmelt as a driver of ecosystem response in water limited mountain forests of the Western U.S.", "abstract":"Recent large-scale changes in snow cover over Western North America associated with climate warming may have widespread impacts on water availability. These changes have potentially varied impacts on water availability as snowmelt influences, soil moisture, streamflow, and evapotranspiration. These changes may significantly alter runoff production and gross primary productivity in mountain forests. Analysis of remotely sensed and in situ soil moisture data indicate strong sensitivities of the timing of peak soil moisture to the timing of snowmelt. Observations of vegetation greenness indicate strong forest and understory growth dependencies associated with snow accumulation, snowmelt, and soil moisture with peak snow water equivalent explaining 40-50% of inter-annual greenness variability in the Rocky Mountains. Examples of these dependencies will be presented based on the 2012 drought in the Southwestern US whereby near record low snow accumulation and record high potential evapotranspiration have resulted in record low forest greening as evident in the 30+ year satellite record. Forest response to aridity in 2012 was exacerbated by forest disturbance with greenness anomalies 90% greater in magnitude in Bark Beetle and Spruce Budworm affected areas versus undisturbed areas and 182% greater in magnitude in areas impacted by fire. Greenness sensitivities to aridity showed seasonal dependencies with record high Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) values in April (14% above average) and record low NDVI values in July (7% below average). Gross primary productivity estimates from the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) and from the Niwot Ridge, Colorado Ameriflux tower indicate record high April GPP (30% and 90% above average for MODIS and the tower, respectively) and record low July GPP (19% and 30% below average, respectively). These energy, water, ecosystem relationships indicate that the sensitivity of ecosystems to changes in climate is heavily dependent on snowpack processes. Given potential future changes in land cover of mountainous regions, the results of these measurements may identify tipping points regarding hydrologic sensitivities across gradients in physiography.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86624", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86625" } }
{"authors":"Carter Emmart::American Museum of Natural History--", "title":"IN41D-07: NASA GIBS Use in Live Planetarium Shows", "abstract":"The American Museum of Natural History’s Hayden Planetarium was rebuilt in year 2000 as an immersive theater for scientific data visualization to show the universe in context to our planet. Specific astrophysical movie productions provide the main daily programming, but interactive control software, developed at AMNH allows immersive presentation within a data aggregation of astronomical catalogs called the Digital Universe 3D Atlas. Since 2006, WMS globe browsing capabilities have been built into a software development collaboration with Sweden’s Linkoping University (LiU). The resulting Uniview software, now a product of the company SCISS, is operated by about fifty planetariums around that world with ability to network amongst the sites for global presentations. Public presentation of NASA GIBS has allowed authoritative narratives to be presented within the range of data available in context to other sources such as Science on a Sphere, NASA Earth Observatory and Google Earth KML resources. Specifically, the NOAA supported World Views Network conducted a series of presentations across the US that focused on local ecological issues that could then be expanded in the course of presentation to national and global scales of examination. NASA support of for GIBS resources in an easy access multi scale streaming format like WMS has tremendously enabled particularly facile presentations of global monitoring like never before. Global networking of theaters for distributed presentations broadens out the potential for impact of this medium. Archiving and refinement of these presentations has already begun to inform new types of documentary productions that examine pertinent, global interdependency topics.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86625", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86626" } }
{"authors":"Gene Henry::Lamont -Doherty Earth Observatory--Jerry McManus::Columbia University of New York--William Curry::Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences--Natalie Roberts::University of Cambridge--Alexander Piotrowski::University of Cambridge--Lloyd Keigwin::Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution--", "title":"PP53C-2370: Oceanic and Climate phasing analysis across Marine Isotope Stage 3", "abstract":"Glacial climate oscillated between cold stadial periods similar to the Last Glacial Maximum and warmer periods more similar to today from 25,000 to 60,000 years BP, an envelop of time referred to as marine isotope stage three (MIS3). The sudden warmings (Dansgaard-Oeschger events) and ice sheet surges (Heinrich events) have long captured researchers’ attention as a means of exploring significant perturbations to the climate system. The climate dynamics associated with these events have been recently elucidated throughhigh-resolution analysis of ice and sediment core archives. In particular, it has been recently demonstrated through synchronization of Greenlandic and Antarctic ice cores that abrupt climate events propagated from the Northern to Southern hemisphere. Likewise, during Heinrich events ice rafted detritus appeared in the Northern North Atlantic generally after cold stadial conditions had already been established. These results indict the ocean’s conveyor as the vehicle hemispheric partitioning heat across these events. Here we test the phased response of multiple paleoproxies sensitive to circulation across these abrupt climate events through all of MIS3. Through correlation analysis of multiple paleoproxy records generated from a high accumulation sediment core taken from the Bermuda Rise, we examine the phase relationship of high latitude climate records with the kinematic circulation proxy Pa/Th, benthic d13C and d18O, SST, d18Osw, CaCO3 content, 230Th-normalized bulk and component fluxes in order to infer the sequence of change across these abrupt millennial events. We find that shifts in water mass composition precede increases in temperatures across the identified time interval, while the export of Pa relative to Th increases in tandem with changes in with Bermuda Rise SST estimates during warmings, but lags during cooling. Rapid shifts in thorium normalized carbonate flux supply secondary evidence for changes in preservation accompanying changes in water mass chemistry.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86626", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86627" } }
{"authors":"Andre Mu::University of Melbourne--John Moreau::University of Melbourne--", "title":"B13K-07: Deep aquifer prokaryotic community responses to CO2 geosequestration", "abstract":"Little is known about potential microbial responses to supercritical CO2 (scCO2) injection into deep subsurface aquifers, a currently experimental means for mitigating atmospheric CO2 pollution being trialed at several locations around the world. One such site is the Paaratte Formation of the Otway Basin (~1400 m below surface; 60°C; 2010 psi), Australia. Microbial responses to scCO2 are important to understand as species selection may result in changes to carbon and electron flow. A key aim is to determine if biofilm may form in aquifer pore spaces and reduce aquifer permeability and storage. This study aimed to determine in situ, using 16S rRNA gene, and functional metagenomic analyses, how the microbial community in the Otway Basin geosequestration site responded to experimental injection of 150 tons of scCO2. We demonstrate an in situ sampling approach for detecting deep subsurface microbial community changes associated with geosequestration. First-order level analyses revealed a distinct shift in microbial community structure following the scCO2 injection event, with proliferation of genera Comamonas and Sphingobium. Similarly, functional profiling of the formation revealed a marked increase in biofilm-associated genes (encoding for poly-β-1,6-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine). Global analysis of the functional gene profile highlights that scCO2 injection potentially degraded the metabolism of CH4 and lipids. A significant decline in carboxydotrophic gene abundance (cooS) and an anaerobic carboxydotroph OTU (Carboxydocella), was observed in post-injection samples. The potential impacts on the flow networks of carbon and electrons to heterotrophs are discussed. Our findings yield insights for other subsurface systems, such as hydrocarbon-rich reservoirs and high-CO2 natural analogue sites.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86627", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86628" } }
{"authors":"Ali Akanda::University of Rhode Island--M Alfi Hasan::University of Rhode Island--Emily Serman::University of Rhode Island--Antarpreet Jutla::West Virginia University--Anwar Huq::University of Maryland College Park--Rita Colwell::University of Maryland College Park--", "title":"NH31C-06: Understanding Climate Change Impacts in a Cholera Endemic Megacity: Disease Trends, Hydroclimatic Indicators and Near Future-Term Projections", "abstract":"The last three decades of surveillance data shows a drastic increase of cholera prevalence in the largest cholera-endemic city in the world – Dhaka, Bangladesh. While an endemic trend is getting stronger in the dry season, the post-monsoon season shows increased variability and is epidemic in nature. The pre-monsoon dry season is becoming the dominant cholera season of the year, followed by monsoon flood related propagation in later months of the year. Although the heavily populated and rapidly urbanizing Dhaka region has experienced noticeable shifts in pre monsoon temperature and precipitation patterns and subsequent monsoon variations, to date, there has not been any systematic study on linking the long-term disease trends with observed changes in hydroclimatic indicators. Here, we focus on the past 30-year dynamics of urban cholera prevalence in Dhaka with changes in climatic or anthropogenic forcings to develop projections for the next 30-year period. We focus on the dry and the wet season indicators individually, and develop trends of maximum rainfall intensity, lowest rainfall totals in the pre-monsoon period, number of consecutive dry days, number of wet days, and number of rainy days with greater than 500mm rainfall using a recently developed gridded data product – and compare with regional hydrology, flooding, water usage, changes in distribution systems, population growth and density in urban settlements, and frequency of natural disasters. We then use a bias correction method to develop the next 30 years projections of CMIP5 Regional Climate Model outputs and impacts on cholera prevalence using a probabilistic forecasting approach.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86628", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86629" } }
{"authors":"Timothy Filley::Purdue University--Dali Guo::Chinese Academy of Sciences--Alain Plante::University of Pennsylvania--", "title":"EP31A-0983: Promoting US-China Critical Zone Science Collaboration and Coordination Through Established Subnational Bilateral Science Partnerships: The US-China EcoPartnership for Economic and Environmental Sustainability.", "abstract":"The concept of critical zone (CZ) science has gained wide recognition with actively funded and emerging CZ observatory programs across the globe. There is much to be gained through international collaboration that links field, laboratory, and modeling efforts from across the emerging global CZ networks, but building international ties is difficult, especially when peer-to-peer connections are nascent, separated by great distances, and span different cultural and political environments. The U.S. and China share many climatic and geological similarities but differ greatly in the magnitude and timescale of human alteration of their landscapes making the comparative study of their respective pasts, current state, and future co-evolution an outstanding scientific opportunity to better understand, predict, and respond to human influence on the CZ. Leveraging the infrastructure and trust capital of longstanding sub-national volunteer scientific networks to bring together people and organizations is a resource-efficient mechanism to build cross-network CZ programs. The U.S.-China EcoPartnership for Environmental Sustainability (USCEES) is one of 30 current EcoPartnerships established beginning in May 2008 by a joint agreement between the U.S. Department of State and China’s National Development and Reform Commission with the overarching goal of addressing the interconnected challenges of environmental, social, and economic sustainability through bi-national research innovation, communication, and entrepreneurship. The 2015 USCEES annual conference on “Critical Zone Science, Sustainability, and Services in a Changing World” was co-sponsored by the U.S. Cross-CZO Working Group on Organic Matter Dynamics and hosted three NSF-funded workshops on organic matter dynamics:1) methods for large and complex data analysis, 2) erosion and deposition processes, and 3) mineralogical and microbial controls on reactivity and persistence. This paper highlights outcomes from the workshops that include consensus recommendations for common measurements, methods, laboratories, and long-term experiments to support cross-U.S. CZO and international CZ science, and the role of the EcoPartnership program in facilitating scientific exchange between CZ scientists in the U.S. and China.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86629", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86630" } }
{"authors":"Louisa Stark::University of Utah--Molly Malone::University of Utah--", "title":"ED14A-05: iUTAH Summer Research Institutes: Supporting the STEM Pipeline Through Engagement of High School, Undergraduate and Graduate Students, Secondary Teachers, and University Faculty in Authentic, Joint Research Experiences", "abstract":"Multiple types of programs are needed to support the STEM workforce pipeline from pre-college through graduate school and beyond. Short-term, intensive programs provide opportunities to participate in authentic scientific research for students who may not be sure of their interest in science and for teachers who may be unable to devote an entire summer to a research experience. The iUTAH (innovative Urban Transitions and Aridregion Hydro-Systainability) Summer Research Institute utilizes an innovative approach for a 5-day program that engages high school and undergraduate students as well as middle and high school teachers in conducting research projects led by graduate students and faculty members. Each Institute involves 3-4 half to full-day research projects. Participants collect (usually in the field) and analyze data for use in on-going research or that is related to a current research project. The participants work in groups with the graduate students to create a poster about each research project. They present their posters on the last day of the Institute at the state-wide meeting of all researchers and involved in this EPSCoR-funded program. In addition to introducing participants to research, one of the Institute’s goals is to provide opportunities for meaningful near-peer interactions with students along the STEM pipeline from high school to undergraduate to graduate school. On the end-of-Institute evaluations, almost all students have reported that their discussions with other participants and with graduate students and faculty were a “Highly effective” or “Effective” part of the Institute. In response to a question about how the Institute will impact their course choices or their plans to pursue a career in science, many high school and undergraduate students have noted that they plan to take more science courses. Each year several undergraduates who were previously unsure about a career in science have indicated that they now intend to pursue a science career. When asked how the Institute will impact their classroom practice, teachers most frequently report that they intend to purchase equipment that will enable them to carry out some of the Institute research projects with their students, and that they plan to provide more opportunities for students to collect and analyze data. Funding: NSF 1208055.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86630", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86631" } }
{"authors":"Andrew Simon::Cardno--", "title":"EP24B-02: Magnitudes and Sources of Catchment Sediment: When A + B Doesn’t Equal C", "abstract":"The export of land-based sediments to receiving waters can cause degradation of water quality and habitat, loss of reservoir capacity and damage to reef ecosystems. Predictions of sources and magnitudes generally come from simulations using catchment models that focus on overland flow processes at the expense of gully and channel processes. This is not appropriate for many catchments where recent research has shown that the dominant erosion sources have shifted from the uplands and fields following European Settlement, to the alluvial valleys today. Still, catchment models which fail to adequately address channel and bank processes are still the overwhelming choice by resource agencies to help manage sediment export. These models often utilize measured values of sediment load at the river mouth to “calibrate” the magnitude of loads emanating from uplands and fields. The difference between the sediment load at the mouth and the simulated upland loading is then proportioned to channel sources. Bank erosion from the Burnett River (a “Reef Catchment” in eastern Queensland) was quantified by comparisons of bank-top locations and by numerical modeling using BSTEM. Results show that bank-derived sediment contributes between 44 and 73% of the sediment load being exported to the Coral Sea. In comparison reported results from a catchment model showed bank contributions of 8%. In absolute terms, this is an increase in the reported average, annual rate of bank erosion from 0.175 Mt/y to 2.0 Mt/y. In the Hoteo River, New Zealand, a rural North Island catchment characterized by resistant cohesive sediments, bank erosion was found to contribute at least 48% of the total specific yield of sediment. Combining the bank-derived, fine-grained loads from some of the major tributaries gives a total, average annual loading rate for fine material of about 10,900 t/y for the studied reaches in the Hoteo River System. If the study was extended to include the lower reaches of the main stem channel and other tributary reaches, this percentage would be higher. Similar studies in the United States using combinations of empirical and numerical modeling techniques have also disclosed that bank-derived sediment can be the major source of sediment in many catchments. An approach to improve the accuracy of predictions is proposed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86631", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86632" } }
{"authors":"Rebecca Powell::University of Denver--Michael Goulden::University of California Irvine--Seth Peterson::University of California Santa Barbara--Dar Roberts::University of California--Christopher Still::Oregon State University--", "title":"B54D-07: Effects of Fine-Scale Landscape Variability on Satellite-Derived Land Surface Temperature Products Over Sparse Vegetation Canopies", "abstract":"Temperature is a primary environmental control on biological systems and processes at a range of spatial and temporal scales, from controlling biochemical processes such as photosynthesis to influencing continental-scale species distribution. The Landsat satellite series provides a long record (since the mid-1980s) of relatively high spatial resolution thermal infrared (TIR) imagery, from which we derive land surface temperature (LST) grids. Here, we investigate fine spatial resolution factors that influence Landsat-derived LST over a spectrally and spatially heterogeneous landscape. We focus on paired sites (inside/outside a 1994 fire scar) within a pinyon-juniper scrubland in Southern California. The sites have nearly identical micro-meteorology and vegetation species composition, but distinctly different vegetation abundance and structure. The tower at the unburned site includes a number of in-situ imaging tools to quantify vegetation properties, including a thermal camera on a pan-tilt mount, allowing hourly characterization of landscape component temperatures (e.g., sunlit canopy, bare soil, leaf litter). We use these in-situ measurements to assess the impact of fine-scale landscape heterogeneity on estimates of LST, including sensitivity to (i) the relative abundance of component materials, (ii) directional effects due to solar and viewing geometry, (iii) duration of sunlit exposure for each compositional type, and (iv) air temperature. To scale these properties to Landsat spatial resolution (~100-m), we characterize the sub-pixel composition of landscape components (in addition to shade) by applying spectral mixture analysis (SMA) to the Landsat Operational Land Imager (OLI) spectral bands and test the sensitivity of the relationships established with the in-situ data at this coarser scale. The effects of vegetation abundance and cover height versus other controls on satellite-derived estimates of LST will be assessed by comparing estimates at the burned vs. unburned sites across multiple seasons (~30 dates).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86632", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86633" } }
{"authors":"William Dietrich::University of California Berkeley--Marisa Palucis::California Institute of Technology--Rebecca Williams::Planetary Science Institute Tucson--Kevin Lewis::Johns Hopkins University--Frances Rivera-Hernandez::University of California Davis--Dawn Sumner::University of California, Davis--", "title":"P43B-2114: What gravel size may tell us about the rivers draining from the north wall of Gale Crater", "abstract":"The exposures of interbeds of mostly fine gravels observed en route to Pahrump Valley in Gale Crate appear to provide no direct indication of channel scale or slope, but they for the first time on Mars reveal the bedload grain size distribution. This is in contrast to remote sensing analysis of Martian channel landforms where width and slope can be estimated and possibly flow depth inferred, but grain size of the channel bed is unknown. Strong terrestrial correlations of discharge and channel width (once corrected for reduced velocity due to lower gravity) likely gives the best estimates of channel flows from remote sensing observations. Calculations based on roughness arguments or estimated grain size and critical shear stresses have much larger error. What can be done, however, if we only know the grain size- the case for the gravel exposures in Gale? We show that crude positive correlations of channel slope with median grain size, can then be used to estimate channel depth and width, each of which vary inversely with channel slope. These empiricisms suggest that the fluvial conglomerates in Gale with grain sizes 4.5 to 9.5 mm may have had been deposited by a channel of a slope between 0.01 and 0.0001, about 0.62 to 2.1 m deep, and 10 to 50 m wide. Using the median bankfull stream velocity from terrestrial studies of 0.9 m/s (corrected for Martian gravity) the predicted discharge is about 5.6 to 94.5 m3/s. The estimated widths alone predict 6 to 85.6 m3/s for the 10 to 50 m channels widths, respectively. This analysis suggests that the gravel bedded rivers that delivered the sand and finer size delta building sediment towards the base of the present Mt. Sharp were of modest scale and slope, placing constraints on the eventual stratigraphic reconstruction of the deposits here.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86633", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86634" } }
{"authors":"Tanu Malik::University of Chicago--Charlie Catlett::University of Chicago--William Engler::University of Chicago--Ian Foster::University of Chicago--Brett Goldstein::University of Chicago--", "title":"IN51A-1800: Plenario: A Spatio-Temporal Platform for Discovery and Exploration of Urban Science Data", "abstract":"The past decade has seen the widespread release of open data concerning city services, conditions, and activities by government bodies and public institutions of all sizes. Hundreds of open data portals now host thousands of datasets of many different types. These new data sources represent enormous potential for improved understanding of urban dynamics and processes—and, ultimately, for more livable, efficient, and prosperous communities. However, those who seek to realize this potential quickly discover that discovering and applying those data relevant to any particular question can be extraordinarily difficult, due to decentralized storage, heterogeneous formats, and poor documentation. In this context, we introduce Plenario, a platform designed to automating time-consuming tasks associated with the discovery, exploration, and application of open city data—and, in so doing, reduce barriers to data use for researchers, policymakers, service providers, journalists, and members of the general public. Key innovations include a geospatial data warehouse that allows data from many sources to be registered into a common spatial and temporal frame; simple and intuitive interfaces that permit rapid discovery and exploration of data subsets pertaining to a particular area and time, regardless of type and source; easy export of such data subsets for further analysis; a user-configurable data ingest framework for automated importing and periodic updating of new datasets into the data warehouse; cloud hosting for elastic scaling and rapid creation of new Plenario instances; and an open source implementation to enable community contributions. We describe here the architecture and implementation of the Plenario platform, discuss lessons learned from its use by several communities, and outline plans for future work.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86634", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86636" } }
{"authors":"Daniella Rempe::University of California Berkeley--W. Jesse Hahm::University of California Berkeley--William Dietrich::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"EP33D-04: The oxidation of landscapes", "abstract":"At the base of the critical zone, fresh rock is transformed through chemical alteration of minerals and fracturing. The resulting hydrologically dynamic weathered bedrock zone strongly influences how mass is routed throughout a landscape. Studies of weathering in a variety of lithologies and climates have documented the role of oxygen in driving the onset of weathering. Porosity is generated through processes such as the formation of sulfuric acid via oxidative pyrite dissolution and strain via iron oxidation in biotite. The transport of meteoric oxygen is therefore a mechanism that links the topographic surface to weathering processes at depth. Here, we present an alternative to the theory that the advance of an oxidation front is driven by downward advection and diffusion of meteoric fluid. We present field data and theory that suggest that the slow drainage of groundwater within fresh bedrock drives the displacement of unreactive pore fluid from low-porosity fresh bedrock. This drainage, and the subsequent introduction of meteoric fluid to fresh rock, is a hillslope scale process driven by channel incision. The resulting distribution of weathered rock across the landscape is thus controlled by the fresh bedrock porosity and permeability and the rate of channel incision.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86636", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86637" } }
{"authors":"Noah Fierer::University of Colorado at Boulder--", "title":"B21J-02: Verrucomicrobia and their role in soil methanol consumption", "abstract":"Bacteria belonging to the phylum Verrucomicrobia are far more ubiquitous and abundant in soil than previous work would suggest. In many soils, a relatively small number of verrucomicrobial phylotypes or ‘species’ can represent more than 25% of the bacterial cells in soil. Since these phylotypes are not closely related to any known cultured isolates or any strains for which we have whole-genome data, we have limited information on what these bacteria are actually doing in soil, their metabolic capabilities, or the niches they inhabit. We have recently assembled the genomes of these dominant Verrucomicrobia from soil metagenomic data and found that these taxa appear to be oligotrophs that specialize in methanol oxidation. This is important because we have found in previous work that methanol likely represents an important source of labile organic carbon to soil microbes in many ecosystems with methanol fluxes likely representing an important, but under-studied, mechanism by which organic carbon is transferred from surface litter layers to mineral soils. Ongoing work has focused on using high-throughput cultivation methods to study soil Verrucomicrobia in vitro and better understand their controls on soil carbon dynamics. Together this work demonstrates how we can leverage recent methodological advances in metagenomics, high-throughput cultivation, and soil trace gas analyses to understand the biogeochemical relevance of an abundant, but mysterious, group of soil microorganisms.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86637", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86638" } }
{"authors":"Albert Colman::University of Chicago--Gerard Olack::University of Chicago--", "title":"PP21A-2207: δ17O and Δ47—The Heavens can Wait.", "abstract":"Most terrestrial systems fall on or close to the Global Meteoric Water Line, GMWL, for 17O and 18O isotopes. Luz and Barken (2010) recently discussed variations from the GMWL, and typically the differences were in the 50 per meg, or 0.05‰, 17O excess. Landais et al. also looked at water from a Vostok ice core, covering the past 150,000 years, and see differences from GMWL on the order of 45 per meg 17O excess. Carbonate samples are analyze for their 13C and 18O to help understand paleo-climate, water sources, and by looking at clumped isotopes, Δ47, the excess of 13C-18O bonds measured by mass spectroscopy on m/z 47. Those samples will also carry thru the 17O-excess in their waters of formation. We modeled the effect of 17O excess on Δ47 and basically there is little effect in the 50 per meg 17O excess range. We also looked at what would happen with 18O spiked samples, presuming the spike does not add 17O. In that case, a 100 ‰ shift in 18O would give rise to -49‰ 17O excess anomaly. That shows a significant effect, a 1.8 ‰ shift in Δ47 and even a 3.5 ‰ shift in the δ13C reading. So spiked samples are not good candidates for clumped isotope analysis, terrestrial samples probably will not have enough of a 17O excess to affect Δ47 measurements, and extra-terrestrial samples will have to be checked.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86638", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86639" } }
{"authors":"Lee Gunderson::Princeton University--", "title":"SH23A-2435: Towards a Global Model of Equilibrium Solar Behavior: the Tachocline as a trans-Alfenic Feature", "abstract":"Observations and simulations suggest that thermal wind balance holds to lowest order in the solar convection zone (SCZ), and an analytic model of solar rotation has been developed by further assuming a functional relationship between the entropy and rotation. Below the SCZ, analytic arguments and simulations have implicated the necessity of a large poloidal field in the deep solar interior for the thin structure of the tachocline. We seek to unify these pictures and find a global equilibrium base state of solar behavior by starting from the exact solution to axisymmetric ideal MHD, the generalized Grad-Shafranov equation, thereby including magnetic field and poloidal flow from the onset. We find that a tachocline-like structure naturally arises as an equilibrium feature if the poloidal Alfvénic Mach number approaches unity near the bottom of the SCZ. FLOW, a code developed to analyze tokamak equilibrium with arbitrary flow, has been adapted for use in the solar regime and used to examine effects of magnetic field and meridional flow. The next steps include constructing a global equilibrium and establishing linear stability. Considering slow perturbations to equilibrium by transport and dissipation provides connections to global solar cycle models (e.g. Babcock-Leighton dynamos).", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86639", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86640" } }
{"authors":"Eric Morway::USGS Nevada Water Science Center--Richard Niswonger::USGS Nevada Water Science Center--Enrique Triana::MWH Global, Inc.--", "title":"H21B-1371: Toward Improved Simulation of Operations in Integrated Hydrologic Modeling", "abstract":"Conjunctive management of groundwater and surface water (GW-SW) resources has received increased attention as the gap between freshwater supply and demand widens in arid and semi-arid regions. The modeling tools used by water managers and government agencies, among others, for distributing the available freshwater supply among a complex set of competing demands in a ‘prior appropriation’ context, rely on loosely-coupled (or ‘feed-forward’) model applications that fail to achieve true convergence among values common to both codes. Commonly, models used for quantifying supply, that is, watershed and groundwater models, are run separately from river operations models that specialize in distributing a finite supply among a wide range of demands. As a result, it may be difficult to achieve a proper water balance among the respective codes, especially during drought conditions. Taking a step closer to a truly integrated environmental modeling framework for conjunctive management of GW-SW resources, the river operations model MODSIM has been integrated with the hydrologic model MODFLOW. MODSIM is a river basin management decision support system that simulates administration of water rights and (or) operational rules within river basins. MODFLOW is a physically-based distributed-parameter finite-difference model historically used for simulating groundwater systems, though the streamflow routing (SFR2) and lake (LAK) packages are capable of simulating surface water systems in hydraulic connection with the underlying alluvial aquifer. On their own, these two packages cannot simulate diversions and (or) releases from reservoirs, instead requiring users to specify these quantities prior to model execution. Through the MODSIM-MODFLOW integration, however, hydrologic processes are simulated simultaneously with dynamic river operations. In this way, solutions are synchronized before moving to the next time step. The newly developed code provides water planners and managers with a more robust decision making support tool than is possible running either code independently or in a feed-forward coupling. Results illustrating the importance of the integration, over and against a feed-forward approach, are provided for a hypothetical test case while real-world applications continue to be developed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86640", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86641" } }
{"authors":"Kyoungsik Ryoo::Korea Water Resources Corporation--Jin Hwang::Korea Water Resources Corporation--Ae-sook Suh::Korea Water Resources Corporation--", "title":"H51E-1425: Development of the one-stop water resources operational system using data of a numerical weather prediction model", "abstract":"This research constructs the one-stop water resources operational system that is based on the connection between short-term numerical weather prediction model(LDAPS, UM3.0, RDAPS) of Korea Meteorological Administration (KMA) and runoff model(COSFIM, K-DRUM) of Korea water resources corporation (K-water) to predict runoff discharge ungagged basin which needs to provide flood and evacuation warning. K-DRUM model works online(Receiving weather forecast data, operating K-DRUM model automatically and offering forecast and warning information to flood manager through forecast monitoring system.), and COSFIM model which needs experience of flood manager and realtime condition data works off line(manager operates COSFIM model with weather forecast data and connects with monitoring system to manage water resources). We used the values for evaluating the prediction result, which predicted cumulative value, observed cumulative value, the rate of predicted and observed cumulative values(%), predicted mean value, observed mean value, the deviation and deviation ratio of the predicted mean value and the observed mean value, standard deviation of predicted and observed value, standard deviation ratio of predicted and observed value(%). In addition, we use the index to be used mainly calculated and observed values in model for quantitative reliability assessment. It was used A dimensionless index of NSE (Nash-Sutcliffe Efficiency), statistics techniques of index errors PBIAS (Percent Bias), and the ratio of mean square error and standard deviation for observations RSR (RMSE-observations Standard deviation Ratio). According to the results of analysis, in order to prevent the damage occurred by hydrological disasters that cannot be identified by only observations of rainfall stations, utilizing the numerical weather predictions can be significant factor in the ungagged basin flood control operations management.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86641", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86642" } }
{"authors":"Fawn Brooks::University of New Mexico Main Campus--", "title":"H41A-1287: Temporal and Climatic Analysis of the Rio Peñasco in New Mexico", "abstract":"Streamflow research usually focuses on perennial streams due to the obvious impact on water budgets and flooding forecasts as well as the readily available data due a higher quantity of gages with longer and more complete data sets. Due to this, most streamflow metrics were derived by analyzing perennial streams and may not accurately characterize streams that have intermittent flow. Even standard metrics used for intermittent streams may not accurately characterize streams that are strongly ephemeral. This study uses statistical methods to analyze the Rio Peñasco near Artesia, NM. Traditional metrics were inadequate in describing the average or variance of this ephemeral stream. This stream has been rerouted or altered numerous times in order to be used for agriculture. In the 1980s, this anthropogenic influence resulted in a drastic decline in discharge rates. ENSO was shown to alter the onset and total volume of non-zero discharge during monsoon months.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86642", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86643" } }
{"authors":"Jessica Badgeley::Colorado College - CC--Erin Pettit::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Christina Carr::University of Alaska Fairbanks--Slawek Tulaczyk::University of California Santa Cruz--Jill Mikucki::University of Tennessee--", "title":"C51B-0726: Imaging an Englacial Brine Conduit within a -17°C Polar Glacier", "abstract":"Despite cold ice, there is evidence of an active zone of englacial brine that taps the subglacial brine reservoir of Taylor Glacier, McMurdo Dry Valleys (average annual air temperature -17°C). As part of the MIDGE (Minimally Invasive Direct Glacial Exploration) project, our geophysical study aims to reveal the hydraulic path of brine through Taylor Glacier prior to surface discharge at Blood Falls. We collected ground-penetrating-radar surveys at the terminus of Taylor Glacier that show a horizontal, linear scattering zone, the first evidence for englacial brine near Blood Falls. The scattering zone extends from Blood Falls upglacier and its trend matches that of past brine discharge cracks. By measuring depression of the basal ice reflector, we estimate a > 4% liquid brine content at the edge of the englacial scattering zone, assuming even dispersal of water within the ice column extending from the top of the scattering zone to the basal reflector. The brine content likely increases towards the center of the scattering zone as the underlying, depressed basal reflector disappears altogether. The concentration of brine at the center of the scattering zone may involve processes such at cryoconcentration and active input of brine from a nearby source. We use hydraulic potential models to map the source pathway of the englacial brine; the glacier’s significant surface relief drives channelization of subglacial fluids. On the northern side of the eastward flowing glacier, channeled fluids are trapped between ice-cored moraines to the north and east and an area of high hydraulic potential to the south. The trapped fluids pond beneath and upglacier from Blood Falls and provide a likely source pool for the observed englacial brine. Although Blood Falls is a unique feature, our results suggest that polar glaciers can support subglacial and englacial hydraulic systems despite a temperature difference between the ice and the brine of nearly 10°C.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86643", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86644" } }
{"authors":"Marina Foster::Arizona State University--Kelin Whipple::Arizona State University--Arjun Heimsath::Arizona State University--", "title":"EP31B-0997: The Evolution of a Perched, Low-Relief, Soil-Mantled Landscape in the Pinaleño Mountains, SE Arizona", "abstract":"To shed light on the processes driving weathering, soil production and erosion in steep landscapes that maintain steep, rocky catchments where soil cover is pervasive, we examine relationships among catchment-mean erosion rate, mean soil thickness, and soil production efficiency on the low-relief, soil-mantled landscape with uniform lithology and climate at the crest of the Pinaleño Mtns in SE Arizona. Both above and below knickpoints on channels draining the upper low-relief landscape, but within the narrow band of elevation where climate is uniform, I utilize high-resolution soil thickness measurements coupled with terrestrial cosmogenic nuclide soil production rate measurements to quantify the efficiency of soil production in this landscape. I present shallow seismic survey data to describe variability in soil thicknesses at a high-resolution scale useful to describe hillslope process. These data are calibrated by soil pit measurements of soil down through saprolite and fractured bedrock. Channel profiles around the edges of the low-relief landscape suggest a transient response to some tectonic disturbance, either due to rock uplift and basin subsidence during Basin and Range tectonic forcing, or more recent incision and base-level drop in adjacent drainage systems. A suite of catchment-averaged erosion rates recently measured along the flanks of this range support the hypothesis that this upper transient surface has been preserved after a late Miocene-Pliocene Basin and Range disturbance that has since been followed by slow topographic decay.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86644", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86645" } }
{"authors":"Xinhua Shen::University of Northern Iowa Prairie View A&M University--Samarita Sarker::Prairie View A&M University--Huanxin Zhang::Michigan Technological University--Hongbo Du::Prairie View A&M University--Ziaul Huque::Prairie View A&M University--Raghava Kommalapati::Prairie View A&M University--", "title":"A21A-0070: Assessment of 2012 on-road mobile source episode specific emissions on air quality in Houston", "abstract":"Houston has long been known to suffer from poor air quality, especially ground ozone level produced from photochemical reactions between nitrogen oxides (NOx) and Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) in the presence of sunlight. In order to investigate impact of various emissions on air quality in Houston, combination of biogenic emissions with anthropogenic emissions were simulated for 2012 ozone episode. In this research, impact of on-road mobile source emissions on air quality in Houston were assessed. On-road mobile source inventories were developed using the EPA's MOVES (MOtor Vehicle Emission Simulator) model. Emissions Preprocessor System was used to convert the developed on-road mobile source inventories to suitable format. The converted on-road mobile source inventories were combined with biogenic emissions as the air quality model input. CAMx (Comprehensive Air quality Model with extensions) model was used to simulate various air pollutants concentrations for 2012 ozone episode. Simulation results showed that various transportation patterns have quite different influences on the air quality in this region.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86645", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86646" } }
{"authors":"Alexander Nowak::Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry--", "title":"B51A-0407: Online Determination of 18O Fractionation Between CO2 and Soil-Water during Soil Dessication by a Novel Mid-Infrared CO2 Isotope Analyzer Coupled to an Dynamic Chamber Incubation System", "abstract":"The stable oxygen isotope composition of CO2 is an important tracer for quantifying gas interactions between soils and atmosphere. Soils impact atmospheric 18O-CO2 signatures by CO2-H2O equilibration during diffusion of CO2 through the soil column. However, recent research has revealed that also catalytic reactions by carbonic anhydrase, an enzyme used by microorganisms for triggering the conversion of CO2 and water to bicarbonate and protons, is an important factor influencing the oxygen isotopic signature of CO2. In order to study the importance of biotic and abiotic factors for 18O-CO2, we used a novel mid infrared 18O/13C-CO2 analyser coupled to a dynamic chamber system, which allowed us to measure online 18O and 13C of a continuous CO2 stream percolating through soil samples while drying out from fully water saturated to air dry. Our results indicate that changes in CO2- 18O signatures peak at certain soil moistures levels, which is most probably catalysed by the activity of certain microbial groups under optimum growth conditions. More analyses with different soil types and depths, combined with molecular analyses are planned in order to understand the importance of microbial processes and dynamics for influencing soil-CO2 interactions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86646", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86647" } }
{"authors":"Ana Rosner::USGS/Biological Resources Division Cadmus Group, Inc.--Benjamin Letcher::USGS/Biological Resources Division--Richard Vogel::Tufts University--Paula Rees::Water Resources Research Center--", "title":"NH51B-1890: New methods in hydrologic modeling and decision support for culvert flood risk under climate change", "abstract":"Assessing culvert flood vulnerability under climate change poses an unusual combination of challenges. We seek a robust method of planning for an uncertain future, and therefore must consider a wide range of plausible future conditions. Culverts in our case study area, northwestern Massachusetts, USA, are predominantly found in small, ungaged basins. The need to predict flows both at numerous sites and under numerous plausible climate conditions requires a statistical model with low data and computational requirements. We present a statistical streamflow model that is driven by precipitation and temperature, allowing us to predict flows without reliance on reference gages of observed flows. The hydrological analysis is used to determine each culvert's risk of failure under current conditions. We also explore the hydrological response to a range of plausible future climate conditions. These results are used to determine the tolerance of each culvert to future increases in precipitation. In a decision support context, current flood risk as well as tolerance to potential climate changes are used to provide a robust assessment and prioritization for culvert replacements.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86647", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86648" } }
{"authors":"Mauri McSaveney::GNS Science-Institute of Geological and Nuclear Sciences Ltd--", "title":"NH41A-1796: Grain Flow at High Stresses", "abstract":"The transport mechanism of rapid long-runout rock avalanches was a hotly debated topic when I came on the scene in 1967. So how come it is still debated today? My explanation is that it is the expected outcome of peer review, poor comprehension, and technological advances outpacing intellectual advances. Why think about the problem when we can model it! So let us think about the problem. Shreve thought that rock avalanches fell upon and trapped a layer of air. What physics was he thinking about? It is how feathers and tissue papers fall. When my rock avalanches fly, they fly like unlubricated bricks using the physics of projectiles and ballistics. But the main transport mechanism is not flight. The dominant impression from watching a rock avalanche in motion is of fluid flow, as Heim described it in 1882. A rock avalanche is a very large grain flow. Bagnold studied dispersive grain flows, but why should one assume that rock avalanches are dispersive grain flows as many do. The more common grain flow type is a dense grain flow and rock avalanches are dense grain flows in which the weight can and does generate very high stresses at grain contacts. Brittle rock deforms elastically up to its compressive strength, whereupon it breaks, releasing elastic strain as transient elastic strain (seismic energy to a seismologist, acoustic energy to a physicist). Melosh and others have shown that acoustic energy can fluidize a grain mass. There is no exotic physics behind grain flow at high stress. When grains break, the released elastic strain has to go somewhere, and it goes somewhere principally by transmission though grain contacts. Depending on the state of stress at the grain contact, the contact will pass the stress or will slip at conventional values of Coulomb friction. Enough thinking! A physical model of the entire process is too big for any laboratory. So whose numerical model will do it?", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86648", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86650" } }
{"authors":"Alejandro Orsi::Texas A & M University College Station--Natalie Zielinski::Texas A & M University College Station--Cody Webb::Texas A & M University College Station--Bruce Huber::--", "title":"C21A-0696: Ocean-Ice-Atmosphere Interactions off Sabrina and Adelie Coasts During NBP1402 and AU1402", "abstract":"Diverse interactions of winds, currents and ice around Antarctica dictate how, where and when the world’s densest waters form, massive floating ice shelves and glaciers melt, gases are exchanged at the sea surface, and primary productivity. Compelled by recent rate estimates of East Antarctic Ice Sheet mass loss, we contrast the paths and mixing histories of oceanic waters reaching the continental ice edge off the Sabrina and Adelie coasts relying on a the first synoptic shipboard measurements made by U.S. (NBP1402) and Australian (AU1402) scientists. Analysis of historical hydrography and sea ice concentration fields within the Mertz Polynya indicates the apparent effect of evolving ocean-ice- atmosphere interactions on the characteristics of local Shelf Water (SW) sources. A polynya dominated water mass structure similar to that observed off the Adelie Coast before the removal of the Mertz Ice Tongue was expected to the west of the Dalton Ice Tongue (DIT). However, there was no evidence of dense SW off Sabrina Coast during both summer cruises of 2014 and 2015, thus lessening the region’s preconceived influence to global meridional overturning. Present sea ice production within the eastern Dalton Polynya is overshadowed by freshwater input to relatively stable interior upper waters. The Antarctic Coastal Current (ACoC) picks up distinct meltwater contributions along the DIT western flank and in front of the Moscow University Ice Shelf (MUIS) and Totten Glacier (TG). Unlike over other highly influential margins to global sea level rise, the main evidence of inflow and mixing of relatively warm oceanic waters is reduced to relatively cold thermocline water (< 0.3°C) from the continental slope. This source water enters the eastern trough off Sabrina Coast and is swiftly steered poleward by complex underlying topography. Meltwater export from beneath the MUIS and TG is observed at newly discovered trenches that effectively constrain sub-cavity inflow to low salinity near-freezing waters drawn from intermediate levels of the adjacent westward flowing ACoC. Winds, currents and ice interactions observed off Sabrina Coast during NBP1402 and AU1402 are most likely widespread, in view of reported decadal freshening of upper waters over the Antarctic continental shelf and their localized AABW outflows.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86650", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86651" } }
{"authors":"Sabrina Garcia::National Institute for Amazon Research (INPA)--", "title":"B51D-0454: Isoprene leaf emission under CO2 free atmosphere: why and how?", "abstract":"Isoprene (C5H8) is a reactive hydrocarbon gas emitted at high rates by tropical vegetation, which affects atmospheric chemistry and climate and, in the leaf level, is a very important agent against environmental stress. Under optimal conditions for photosynthesis, the majority of carbon used for isoprene biosynthesis is a direct product from recently assimilated atmospheric CO2. However, the contribution of ‘alternate’ carbon sources, that increase with leaf temperature, have been demonstrated and emissions of isoprene from ‘alternate’ carbon sources under ambient CO2 below the compensation point for photosynthesis have been observed. In this study, we investigated the response of leaf isoprene emissions under 450 ppm CO2 and CO2 free atmosphere as a function of light and leaf temperature. At constant leaf temperature (30 °C) and CO2 free atmospheres, leaves of the tropical species Inga edulis showed net emissions of CO2 and light-dependent isoprene emissions which stagnated at low light levels (75 µmol m-2 s-1 PAR) and account for 25% of that observed with 450 ppm CO2. Under constant light (1000 µmol m-2 s-1 PAR) and CO2 free atmospheres, a increase of leaf temperatures from 25 to 40 °C resulted in net emissions of CO2 and temperature-dependent isoprene emissions which reached values up to 17% of those under 450 ppm CO2. Our observations suggest that, under environmental stress, as high light/temperature and drought (when the stomata close and the amount of internal CO2 decreases), the ‘alternate’ carbon can maintain photosynthesis rates resulting in the production of isoprene, independent of atmospheric CO2, through the re-assimilation of internal released CO2 as an ‘alternate’ carbon sources for isoprene.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86651", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86652" } }
{"authors":"Athanasius Cipta::Australian National University Geological Agency of Indonesia--Erdinc Saygin::Australian National University--Phil Cummins::Australian National University--Masturyono Masturyono::Indonesian Agency for Meteorology, Climatology and Geophysics--Ariska Rudyanto::Indonesian Agency for Meteorology, Climatology and Geophysics--Masyhur Irsyam::Bandung Institute of Technology--", "title":"S33A-2745: Seismic Characterization of the Jakarta Basin", "abstract":"Jakarta, Indonesia, is home to more than 10 million people. Many of these people live in seismically non-resilient structures in an area that historical records suggest is prone to earthquake shaking. The city lies in a sedimentary basin composed of Quaternary alluvium that experiences rapid subsidence (26 cm/year) due to groundwater extraction. Forecasts of how much subsidence may occur in the future are dependent on the thickness of the basin. However, basin geometry and sediment thickness are poorly known. In term of seismic hazard, thick loose sediment can lead to high amplification of seismic waves, of the kind that led to widespread damage in Mexico city during the Michoacan Earthquake of 1985. In order to characterize basin structure, a temporary seismograph deployment was undertaken in Jakarta in Oct 2013- Jan 2014. A total of 96 seismic instrument were deployed throughout Jakarta were deployed throughout Jakarta at 3-5 km spacing. Ambient noise tomography was applied to obtain models of the subsurface velocity structure. Important key, low velocity anomalies at short period (<8s) correspond to the main sedimentary sub-basins thought to be present based on geological interpretations of shallow stratigraphy in the Jakarta Basin. The result shows that at a depth of 300 m, shear-wave velocity in the northern part (600 m/s) of the basin is lower than that in the southern part. The most prominent low velocity structure appears in the northwest of the basin, down to a depth of 800 m, with velocity as low as 1200 m/s. This very low velocity indicates the thickness of sediment and the variability of basin geometry. Waveform computation using SPECFEM2D shows that amplification due to basin geometry occurs at the basin edge and the thick sediment leads to amplification at the basin center. Computation also shows the longer shaking duration occurrs at the basin edge and center of the basin. The nest step will be validating the basin model using earthquake events recorded by the Jakarta array. The Bohol 2013 earthquake is one good candidate event for model validation. This will require using a source model for the Bohol earthquake and a plane wave input to SPECFEM3D.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86652", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86653" } }
{"authors":"Jim Williams::Deep Decarbonization Pathways Project--", "title":"PA31B-2163: Policy Implications of Deep Decarbonization in the United States", "abstract":"Independent research teams from sixteen of the largest greenhouse gas (GHG) emitting countries have participated in a collaborative two-year project developing emission reduction scenarios for their own countries consistent with limiting anthropogenic warming to 2 C or less. This talk discusses the policy implications of the work done by the Deep Decarbonization Pathways Project (DDPP) at the US federal and international levels, including new ways of informing decision makers about the requirements of an energy system transformation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86653", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86654" } }
{"authors":"Ethan Davis::University Corporation for Atmospheric Research--Mohan Ramamurthy::Organization Not Listed--Joshua Young::University Corporation for Atmospheric Research--Ward Fisher::University Corporation for Atmospheric Research--Russell Rew::University Corporation for Atmospheric Research--", "title":"IN34A-08: Unidata: 30 Years of FOSS for the Geosciences", "abstract":"Unidata's core mission is to serve academic research and education communities by facilitating access and use of real-time weather data. To this end, Unidata develops, distributes, and supports several Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) packages. These packages are largely focused on data management, access, analysis and visualization.  This presentation will discuss the lessons Unidata has gathered over thirty years of FOSS development, support, and community building. These lessons include what it takes to be a successful FOSS organization, how to adapt to changing ` best practices`  and the emergence of new FOSS tools and services, and techniques for dealing with software end-of-life. We will also discuss our approach when supporting a varied user community spanning end users and software developers. Strong user support has been an important key to Unidata's successful community building.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86654", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86655" } }
{"authors":"Kishore Hari::Organization Not Listed--", "title":"ED43A-0864: Science Festivals: Grand Experiments in Public Outreach", "abstract":"Since the Cambridge Science Festival launched in 2007, communities across the United States have experimented with the science festival format, working out what it means to celebrate science and technology. What have we learned, and where might we go from here? The Science Festival Alliance has supported and tracked developments among U.S. festivals, and this presentation will present key findings from three years of independent evaluation. While science festivals have coalesced into a distinct category of outreach activity, the diversity of science festival initiatives reflects the unique character of the regions in which the festivals are organized. This symposium will consider how festivals generate innovative public programming by adapting to local conditions and spur further innovation by sharing insights into such adaptations with other festivals. With over 55 annual large scale science festivals in the US alone, we will discuss the implications of a dramatic increase in future festival activity.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86655", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86657" } }
{"authors":"Emily Johnson::New Mexico State University Main Campus--", "title":"V33B-3101: Eruption Depths, Magma Storage and Magma Degassing at Sumisu Caldera, Izu-Bonin Arc: Evidence from Glasses and Melt Inclusions", "abstract":"Island arc volcanoes can become submarine during cataclysmal caldera collapse. The passage of a volcanic vent from atmospheric to under water environment involves complex modifications of the eruption style and subsequent transport of the pyroclasts. Here, we use FTIR measurements of the volatile contents of glass and melt inclusions in the juvenile pumice clasts in the Sumisu basin and its surroundings (Izu-Bonin arc) to investigate changes in eruption depths, magma storage and degassing over time. This study is based on legacy cores from ODP 126, where numerous unconsolidated (<65 ka), extremely thick (few m to >250 m), massive to normally graded pumice lapilli-tuffs were recovered over four cores (788C, 790A, 790B and 791A). Glass and clast geochemistry indicate the submarine Sumisu caldera as the source of several of these pumice lapilli-tuffs. Glass chips and melt inclusions from these samples were analyzed using FTIR for H2O and CO2 contents. Glass chips record variable H2O contents; most chips contain 0.6-1.6 wt% H2O, corresponding to eruption depths of 320-2100 mbsl. Variations in glass H2O and pressure estimates suggest that edifice collapse occurred prior-to or during eruption of the oldest of these samples, and that the edifice may have subsequently grown over time. Sanidine-hosted melt inclusions from two units record variably degassed but H2O-rich melts (1.1-5.6 wt% H2O). The lowest H2O contents overlap with glass chips, consistent with degassing and crystallization of melts until eruption, and the highest H2O contents suggest that large amounts of degassing accompanied likely explosive eruptions. Most inclusions, from both units, contain 2-4 wt% H2O, which further indicates that the magmas crystallized at pressures of ~50-100 MPa, or depths ~400-2800 m below the seafloor. Further glass and melt inclusion analyses, including major element compositions, will elucidate changes in magma storage, degassing and evolution over time.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86657", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86658" } }
{"authors":"Bian He::Institute of Atmospheric Physics--", "title":"OS53A-2007: The Role of Atmospheric Heating over the South China Sea and Western Pacific Regions in Modulating Asian Summer Climate under the Global Warming Background", "abstract":"Global warming is one of the most significant climate change signals at the earth's surface. However, the responses of monsoon precipitation to global warming show very distinct regional features, especially over the South China Sea (SCS) and surrounding regions during boreal summer. To understand the possible dynamics in these specific regions under the global warming background, the changes in atmospheric latent heating and their possible influences on global climate are investigated by both observational diagnosis and numerical sensitivity simulations. Results indicate that summertime latent heating has intensified in the SCS and western Pacific, accompanied by increased precipitation, cloud cover, lower-tropospheric convergence, and decreased sea level pressure. Sensitivity experiments show that middle and upper tropospheric heating causes an east–west feedback pattern between SCS–western Pacific and South Asia, which strengthens the South Asian High in the upper troposphere and moist convergence in the lower troposphere, consequently forcing a descending motion and adiabatic warming over continental South Asia and leading to a warm and dry climate. When air–sea interaction is considered, the simulation results are overall more similar to observations, and in particular the bias of precipitation over the Indian Ocean simulated by AGCMs has been reduced. The results highlight the important role of latent heating in adjusting the changes in sea surface temperature through atmospheric dynamics.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86658", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86659" } }
{"authors":"Wei Liu::W. W. Hansen Experimental Physics Laboratory. Stanford University Lockheed Martin Solar and Astrophysics Laboratory--Leon Ofman::Catholic University of America--Cooper Downs::Predictive Science Inc.--Chun Ming Mark Cheung::Lockheed Martin Solar and Astrophysics Laboratory--Brittany Broder::Western Kentucky University--Bart De Pontieu::Lockheed Martin Solar and Astrophysics Laboratory--", "title":"SH54B-02: Flare-associated Fast-mode Coronal Wave Trains Discovered by SDO/AIA: Physical Properties and Implications", "abstract":"Quasi-periodic Fast Propagating wave trains (QFPs) are a new observational phenomenon discovered in extreme ultraviolet (EUV) by the Atmospheric Imaging Assembly (AIA) onboard the Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO). They are fast-mode magnetosonic waves, closely related to quasi-periodic pulsations in solar flare emission ranging from radio to X-ray wavelengths. The significance of QFPs lies in their diagnostic potential, because they can provide critical clues to flare energy release and serve as new tools for coronal seismology. In this presentation, we report recent advances in observing and modeling QFPs. For example, using differential emission measure (DEM) inversion, we found clear evidence of heating and cooling cycles that are consistent with alternating compression and rarefaction expected for magnetosonic wave pulses. Moreover, recent IRIS observations of QFP source regions revealed sawtooth-like flare ribbon motions, indicative of pulsed magnetic reconnection, that are correlated with QFP excitation. More interestingly, from a survey of over 100 QFP events, we found a preferential association with eruptive flares rather than confined flares. We will discuss the implications of these results and the potential roles of QFPs in coronal heating, energy transport, and solar eruptions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86659", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86660" } }
{"authors":"Peter Hunana::University of Alabama in Huntsville--Gary Zank::University of Alabama in Huntsville--Melvyn Goldstein::NASA Goddard SFC--", "title":"SH33A-2457: CGL and Landau fluid simulations of turbulence", "abstract":"We will present 3 dimensional freely decaying and forced simulations of turbulence with different fluid models such as CGL (double adiabatic) model and Landau fluid models. Simulations will be aimed at the modeling of the spectral break around the proton gyroscale. We will also discuss thresholds and damping rates of firehose and mirror instabilieties.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86660", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86661" } }
{"authors":"Natalie Glines::SETI Institute Mountain View NASA Ames Research Center--Virginia Gulick::NASA Ames Research Center SETI Institute Mountain View--Patrick Freeman::University of California Santa Cruz NASA Ames Research Center--", "title":"EP53A-0957: Melt water-driven gully formation in Moni Crater, Mars", "abstract":"The southern mid-latitude 5-km diameter Moni Crater (47S, 18.5E) in Noachis Terra is typical of many small craters of this latitude, containing both gullies on its walls and arcuate ridges on its floor. Interpreted by Howard (2003) and others as remnant terminal moraines, these ridges are located at the distal margins of the gullies’ debris aprons, suggesting a possible association in their formation. Our results suggest that these arcuate ridges might result from the downslope movement of ice-rich deposits that pushed pre-existing ice-rich crater floor deposits into a moraine-like ridge. The pre-existing floor deposits can be interpreted to be a form of sublimated Concentric Crater Fill (CCF), which would have been among the first ice deposits to erode the Moni Crater walls. If we assume the arcuate ridges to be glacial moraines, then we can also assume the same processes that elevated the ridges also provided melt water to form the gullies. There is evidence that water and ice deposit-related processes incised the gully headwalls, exposing bedrock, plucking boulders, and initiating fractures, through ice-wedging or surface abrasion. HiRISE images (~25cm/pixel) show shallow gullies extending several tens of meters beyond the crater rim, exploiting possible fractures or lineation in the rock. Melt water from these ice deposits, or snow melt, is a potential gully formation mechanism that would be consistent with the shallow runoff-like drainage morphology extending above the gully alcoves and beyond the crater rim. An initial phase of rapid melt water flows would also explain the wider degraded remnant channels we see on the crater slopes. The more gradual melting of ice frozen around headwall rocks could explain a secondary phase of melt water flows that form the more-recent channels.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86661", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86662" } }
{"authors":"Ichiko Shimizu::University of Tokyo--Tadamasa Ueda::University of Tokyo--", "title":"T33H-08: Stress states in subduction zones: Extrapolation of flow laws and piezometric relations of quartz to high-P/low-T metamorphic conditions", "abstract":"Strength profiles across the continental lithosphere have been extensively discussed based on laboratory rock-mechanics data but little is known about the stress states in subduction zones, which are characterized by the presence of aqueous fluids and siliceous sedimentary rocks. Here we focus on the deep parts of the interplate megathrusts that consist of high-P/low-T metamorphic rocks. For example, the depth range from 45 to 60 km of the interplate megathrust in NE Japan, which caused the 2011 M9.0 Tohoku-oki earthquake, corresponds to the blueschist facies zone with temperatures ranging from 300 to 400 C (Shimizu, 2014). To evaluate the stress states during interseismic periods, we used the dislocation creep flow law of wet quartz proposed by Luan and Paterson (1992). We applied the flow law without making a water fugacity correction, because the strength of quartz in high-P/low-T conditions would be governed by concentrations of water-related species within the crystals rather than water fugacity. Thus the present model gives conservative estimates. The result of calculation indicates the shear strength over 200 MPa at the depth of 45 km and 50–100 MPa at 60 km depth. Recrystallized grain size in quartz rocks has been considered as an indicator of paleo-stress but physical basis of the piezometric relations is still in debate. In the theoretical models of grain size piezometers, formation of new grains and grain growth associated with strain-energy or surface-energy driven grain-boundary migration (ρGBM or γGBM) have been considered as elementary processes of dynamic recrystallization (DRX). Recent dynamic equilibrium models predict negative temperature dependence of the mean grain size (e.g., Shimizu, 2008); however, Platt and Behr (2011) pointed out that the processes of ρGBM and γGBM are locally antagonistic and questioned the model assumptions. Here we evaluate relative importance of surface energy in DRX of quartz and proposed a new model that includes possible effects of surface energy drag. The revised piezometric relation is used for paleo-stress estimates in the Sanbagawa metamorphic belt, Japan.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86662", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86663" } }
{"authors":"Wang Zhibin::HIT Harbin Institute of Technology--Qingmei Xiao::HIT Harbin Institute of Technology--Xiaogang Wang::HIT Harbin Institute of Technology--Chijie Xiao::Peking University--Jinxing Zheng::ASIPP--Peng E::HIT Harbin Institute of Technology--Hantao Ji::Princeton University--Weixing Ding::University of California Los Angeles--Quanming Lu::USTC University of Science and Technology of China--Yang Ren::Princeton University--Aohua Mao::HIT Harbin Institute of Technology--", "title":"SM31A-2478: Study of energetic particle dynamics in Harbin Dipole eXperiment (HDX) on Space Plasma Environment Research Facility (SPERF)", "abstract":"Zhibin Wang1, Qingmei Xiao1, Xiaogang Wang1, Chijie Xiao2, Jinxing Zheng3, Peng E1, Hantao Ji1,5, Weixing Ding4, Quaming Lu6, Y. Ren1,5, Aohua Mao1 1 Laboratory for Space Environment and Physical Sciences, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China 150001 2 State Key Lab of Nuclear Physics & Technology, and School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing, China 100871 3ASIPP, Hefei, China, 230031 4University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90095 5Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08543 6University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China, 230026 A new terrella device for laboratory studies of space physics relevant to the inner magnetospheric plasmas, Harbin Dipole eXperiment (HDX), is scheduled to be built at Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), China. HDX is one of two essential parts of Space Plasma Environment Research Facility (SPERF), which is a major national research facility for space physics studies. HDX is designed to provide a laboratory experimental platform to reproduce the earth's magnetospheric structure for investigations on the mechanism of acceleration/loss and wave-particle interaction of energetic particles in radiation belt, and on the influence of magnetic storms on the inner magnetosphere. It can be operated together with Harbin Reconnection eXperiment (HRX), which is another part of SPERF, to study the fundamental processes during interactions between solar wind and Earth’s magnetosphere. In this presentation, the scientific goals and experimental plans for HDX, together with the means applied to generate the plasma with desired parameters, including multiple plasma sources and different kinds of coils with specific functions, as well as advanced diagnostics designed to be equipped to the facility for multi-functions, are reviewed. Three typical scenarios of HDX with operations of various coils and plasma sources to study specific physical processes in space plasmas will also be presented.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86663", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86664" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"H43H-1635: Downscaling Satellite Data for Predicting Catchment-scale Root Zone Soil Moisture with Ground-based Sensors and an Ensemble Kalman Filter", "abstract":"Predicting root zone (0-100 cm) soil moisture (RZSM) content at a catchment-scale is essential for drought and flood predictions, irrigation planning, weather forecasting, and many other applications. Satellites, such as the NASA Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP), can estimate near-surface (0-5 cm) soil moisture content globally at coarse spatial resolutions. We develop a hierarchical Ensemble Kalman Filter (EnKF) data assimilation modeling system to downscale satellite-based near-surface soil moisture and to estimate RZSM content across the Shale Hills Critical Zone Observatory at a 1-m resolution in combination with ground-based soil moisture sensor data. In this example, a simple infiltration model within the EnKF-model has been parameterized for 6 soil-terrain units to forecast daily RZSM content in the catchment from 2009 – 2012 based on AMSRE. LiDAR-derived terrain variables define intra-unit RZSM variability using a novel covariance localization technique. This method also allows the mapping of uncertainty with our RZSM estimates for each time-step. A catchment-wide satellite-to-surface downscaling parameter, which nudges the satellite measurement closer to in situ near-surface data, is also calculated for each time-step. We find significant differences in predicted root zone moisture storage for different terrain units across the experimental time-period. Root mean square error from a cross-validation analysis of RZSM predictions using an independent dataset of catchment-wide in situ Time-Domain Reflectometry (TDR) measurements ranges from 0.060-0.096 cm3 cm-3, and the RZSM predictions are significantly (p < 0.05) correlated with TDR measurements [r = 0.47-0.68]. The predictive skill of this data assimilation system is similar to the Penn State Integrated Hydrologic Modeling (PIHM) system. Uncertainty estimates are significantly (p < 0.05) correlated to cross validation error during wet and dry conditions, but more so in dry summer seasons. Developing an EnKF-model system that downscales satellite data and predicts catchment-scale RZSM content is especially timely, given the anticipated release of SMAP surface moisture data in 2015.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86664", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86665" } }
{"authors":"Robert Pappalardo::Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology--Louise Prockter::Applied Physics Laboratory Johns Hopkins--David Senske::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Kurt Retherford::Southwest Research Institute--Elizabeth Turtle::Applied Physics Laboratory Johns Hopkins--Diana Blaney::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Philip Christensen::Arizona State University--Donald Blankenship::University of Texas at Austin--Carol Raymond::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Joseph Westlake::JHUAPL--Jack Waite::Southwest Research Institute San Antonio--Sascha Kempf::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics--Geoffrey Collins::Wheaton College--Kevin Hand::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Jonathan Lunine::Cornell University--Melissa McGrath::SETI Institute Mountain View Southwest Research Institute--Francis Nimmo::University of California Santa Cruz--Carol Paty::Georgia Inst. of Technology--Jason Soderblom::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--John Spencer::Southwest Research Institute--Sean Solomon::Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Columbia University--Chris Paranicas::Applied Physics Laboratory Johns Hopkins--", "title":"P13E-01: Scientific Synergies from the Europa Multiple-Flyby Mission", "abstract":"In May 2015, NASA announced selection of a suite of nine instruments for the Europa mission's scientific payload. The payload consists of five remote sensing instruments that cover the wavelength range from ultraviolet through radar and four in situ instruments that measure fields and particles; moreover, gravity science can be achieved via the telecom system, and valuable scientific data could come from the spacecraft’s planned radiation monitoring system. The remote sensing instruments are: an ultraviolet spectrograph (Europa-UVS); a wide-angle and narrow-angle visible camera system (EIS); an infrared spectrometer (MISE); a thermal instrument (E-THEMIS); and an ice-penetrating radar (REASON). The fields and particles instruments are: a magnetometer suite (ICEMAG); a plasma instrument (PIMS); a time-of-flight mass spectrometer (MASPEX); and a dust analyzer (SUDA). Taken together, the payload has the potential to test hypotheses relevant to the composition, interior, and geology of Europa, in order to address the potential habitability of this intriguing moon. This presentation will introduce the Europa mission’s instrument suite, while providing an overview of the synergistic science that can come from this mission.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86665", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86666" } }
{"authors":"Bradley Pitcher::Oregon State University--Adam Kent::Oregon State University--Anita Grunder::Oregon State University--Robert Duncan::Oregon State University--Daniel Eungard::Oregon State University--", "title":"V31A-3006: Extension and Explosivity during an Eccentric Era of the Early Oregon High Cascades", "abstract":"One of the most profound changes that the Cascade arc experienced since its inception ~40 Ma, was an eastward shift in volcanic activity starting at ~7.5 Ma, which initiated the modern High Cascades. The infant stages of this arc are exceptionally well preserved within the Deschutes Fm. (~7.4 - 4.0 Ma) of Central Oregon. In stark contrast to the effusive andesitic eruptions that dominated ancestral Cascade volcanism for the preceding 10 million years, the Deschutes Fm. contains over 120 (uncorrelated) tephra fall units and 130 ignimbrite units, indicating an unusually explosive period of volcanism. Conservative estimates of the cumulative volume for 14 regionally extensive ignimbrites is greater than 80 km3. Furthermore, 40Ar-39Ar dating of plagioclase from 7 ignimbrites indicate that this large volume was erupted in less than 1 million years (6.24 ±0.07 to 5.44 ±0.04 Ma). Glass compositions of pumice (n=718) range from 54 to 76 wt. % SiO2. Most ignimbrites contain multiple pumice populations, including banded pumice, which can span nearly 20 wt. % SiO2, indicating involvement of multiple magma types. Two ignimbrites have a compositional gap between 62 and 68 wt. % SiO2, possibly suggesting mingling of a mafic magma with a silicic one derived from partial crustal melting. Trace element (e.g. Nb, Ce, Th) compositions of rhyolitic pumice differ between northern- and southern-sourced ignimbrites, which may be indicative of disparate crustal sources of partial melts (i.e. Siletzia in the North). In addition, Deschutes Fm. rocks are enriched in FeO* and Zr/Sr compared to Quaternary Cascades, and are more similar to High Lava Plains. These trends and the absence of amphibole within the formation suggests hotter and drier magmatic conditions. We suggest that regional extension contributed to increased basaltic flux, leading to anatexis of previously un-melted crust beneath the new arc axis, thereby producing large volumes of silicic magma during this short explosive pulse.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86666", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86667" } }
{"authors":"Bethany Ehlmann::California Institute of Technology--", "title":"U31A-02: Macelwane Medal talk: Mars Exploration - A look forward", "abstract":"One of two neighbors in the Sun’s habitable zone, Mars offers a unique opportunity for exploration. Over 60% of the surface is >3.5 Gyr, offering a window into the first billion years of the evolution of a terrestrial planet, including processes such as early crust formation, early atmospheric evolution, and the effects of late heavy bombardment. The past decade of exploration by orbiters and rovers has revolutionized our understanding of the planet. Two of the most exciting discoveries are (1) the discovery of over a dozen aqueous, potentially habitable environments – lacustrine, hydrothermal, pedogenic – in the ancient Mars geologic record, delineated by geomorphology and mineralogy and (2) the presence of near-surface mid-latitude surface ice and recurring slope linae that may imply intermittent liquid brines in near-polar environments today. Near-term funded future robotic exploration plans entail a caching rover, an orbiter focused on ice and potential seep modeling, and return of samples from one landing site. Recent findings and changes in the exploration landscape motivate a number of possible new possibilities and opportunties: (a) multiple exploration rovers to sample ancient Mars’ diverse, potentially habitable environments scouting to understand the planet’s history and for signs of life; (b) the importance of commercial space exploration efforts and private efforts to move beyond Earth.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86667", "section":"Union"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86668" } }
{"authors":"Farzad Kamalabadi::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--David Ren::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--Lara Waldrop::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign--", "title":"SA32A-07: Feasibility of hydrogen density estimation from tomographic sensing of Lyman alpha emission", "abstract":"In this work, we describe the scientific motivation, basic principles, and feasibility of a new approach to the estimation of neutral hydrogen (H) density in the terrestrial exosphere based on the 3-D tomographic sensing of optically thin H emission at 121.6 nm (Lyman alpha). In contrast to existing techniques, Lyman alpha tomography allows for model-independent reconstruction of the underlying H distribution in support of investigations regarding the origin and time-dependent evolution of exospheric structure. We quantitatively describe the trade-off space between the measurement sampling rate, viewing geometry, and the spatial and temporal resolution of the reconstruction that is supported by the data. We demonstrate that this approach is feasible from either earth-orbiting satellites such as the stereoscopic NASA TWINS mission or from a CubeSat platform along a trans-exosphere trajectory such as that enabled by the upcoming Exploration Mission 1 launch.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86668", "section":"Aeronomy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86669" } }
{"authors":"Miwa Yokokawa::Osaka Institute of Technology--Daiki Shozakai::Osaka Institute of Technology--Hiroyuki Higuchi::Osaka Institute of Technology--John Hughes Clarke::University of New Brunswick--Norihiro Izumi::Hokkaido University--", "title":"EP21B-0902: Experimental study on cyclic steps formed by surge-type turbidity currents", "abstract":"Field observations of turbidity currents and seabed topography on the Squamish delta in Howe Sound, British Columbia, Canada have been undertaken which found bedwaves actively migrating in the upstream direction in channels formed on the prodelta slope (Hughes Clarke et al., 2012a; 2012b; 2014; Figure 1). Their topography and behaviour suggest that they are cyclic steps formed by the surge-type turbidity currents. There has been no experimental study to investigate the formative conditions of cyclic steps by the surge-type turbidity currents. We did preliminary experiments on the formation of cyclic steps due to the multiple surge-type density currents, and compare the morphology of the steps with those of Squamish delta. The experiments had been performed at Osaka Institute of Technology. A flume, which is 3.6 m long, 0.3 m deep and 2 cm wide, was submerged into a larger flume, which is 4 m long, 0.4 m deep and 8 cm wide, filled with water. Mixture of salt water (1.18 g/cm3) and plastic particles (1.5 g/cm3, 0.1-0.18 mm in diameter) poured into the upstream end of the inner flume by hand using a funnel. For the example introduced here, the slope of the outer flume was 1.5 degrees, and the mixtures’ whole weight and volumetric concentration ranged from 310 g (3.23 vol.%) to 510 g (8.16 vol.%). These mixtures were poured 105 times, and the thickness of the deposits was measured every 50 cm by photographs. As a result, two mounds (steps) were formed ultimately, which are moving toward upstream direction. Wavelengths are 80 cm and 120 cm respectively. The two kinds of flow depth were measured from photograph, such as the whole thickness of the flow, and the thickness of the lower high-density layer. Calculating the wave steepness and non-dimensional wave number, it turns out that those values using the thickness of the lower high-density layer fall into the region very close to the Squamish data that assuming the flow depth as 0.5 m. This could lead the following interpretations; (1) the geometry, in terms of wave steepness and non-dimensional wave number, of cyclic steps are affected by the flow types such as open-channel flow or density flow, and surge-type flow or continuous flow, (2) the thickness of the lower high-density layer of the density currents (i.e., turbidity currents) may affect the geometry of the bedforms.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86669", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86670" } }
{"authors":"Dushmantha Jayawickreme::Southern Connecticut State University--", "title":"H11I-1462: Abandoned Rice Fields Make Streams Go Dry in Upland Landscapes", "abstract":"In South Asia, new economic realities are driving many rural rice farmers out of agriculture. With increasing neglect, abandonment, and rising conversions of centuries old rice fields into other uses, ecological and environmental consequences of these transitions are becoming progressively clear. Field observations in Sri Lanka’s central highlands suggest that small shifts in rice to non-rice land uses in headwater watersheds can have a domino effect on the productivity and viability of rice fields and other ecological systems downstream by inflicting groundwater recharge reductions, lowering groundwater yields, and causing other hydrological changes. Preliminary analysis shows that although rice itself is a very water intensive crop, the presence of rain-fed upland rice-fields is hugely beneficial to the watersheds they reside. In particular, water benefits of rice appear to be derived from ponded conditions (3-5 inches of standing water) in which rice is grown, and the contribution rice fields makes to enhance water retention and storage capacity of their watersheds during the monsoon season that coincide with the cropping season. In the absence of well managed rice-fields, hilly upland landscapes produce more runoff and retain little rainwater during the wet season. Furthermore, after centuries of intensive use, much of South Asia’s rice fields are nutrient poor and minimally productive without fertilizer applications and other interventions. Consequently, when abandoned, soil erosion and other impacts that affect aquatic ecosystems and watershed health also emerge. Despite these multiple concerns however, little research is currently done to better understand the environmental significance of rice cultivations that are a dominant land-use in many South Asian landscapes. The aim of this presentation is to stir interest among the scientific community to engage more broadly in rice, water, and environmental change research in the face of new economic realities in South Asia.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86670", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86671" } }
{"authors":"Yaqi You::University of Nevada, Reno--Lin Wang::University of Nevada, Reno--Simon Poulson::University of Nevada-Reno--Xilong Wang::Peking University--Baoshan Xing::University of Massachusetts Amherst--Yu Yang::University of Notre Dame--", "title":"H21G-1469: Interaction between Carbon Nanotubes and Aromatic Hydrocarbon-degrading Microbes and its Effect on Carbon Nanotubes Transformation", "abstract":"Due to their unique electrical, optical and mechanical properties, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been substantially produced and widely applied during the past decades, leading to their increased probability of entering the environment. Some estimation suggests that CNTs are accumulated in agricultural systems with their soil concentration increasing by 0.4-157 ng/kg/year. This has raised concerns about environmental impacts of these emerging contaminants including their ecotoxicity. Meanwhile, transformation of CNTs in the environment can significantly affect their transport, bioavailability and thereby ecotoxicity. So far, environmental biodegradation of CNTs remains obscure. Given the high diversity of soil microorganisms and their metabolic potentials, it is important to investigate microbial biodegradation of CNTs under various environmental conditions. This study focuses on an aromatic hydrocarbon-degrading bacterium, Mycobacterium vanbaalenii PYR-1, as a model microorganism capable of ring cleavage. We hypothesize that bacterial activities could transform CNTs to more hydrophilic forms, increasing their aqueous stability and environmental reactivity. We incubated M. vanbaalenii PYR-1 with 13C-labeded multiwall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) for 30 days, monitored δ13C in the system, characterized MWCNTs before and after the reaction, and compared the results with culture-negative controls. To investigate effects of various environmental conditions, including the presence of extracellular oxidative enzymes from white-rot fungi, additional experiments will be conducted and results compared will be compared among different setups. Moreover, we will measure adverse impacts of CNTs on the metabolic activities of M. vanbaalenii PYR-1, particularly its biodegradation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86671", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86672" } }
{"authors":"Britta Jensen::University of Alberta--Michael Evans::University of Alberta--Duane Froese::University of Alberta--Vadim Kravchinsky::University of Alberta--", "title":"GP51A-1324: 150 000 Years of Loess Deposition in Interior Alaska as Told by Magnetic Susceptibility", "abstract":"The Halfway House loess deposit in interior Alaska contains a well-studied and complex paleomagnetic and paleoenvironmental record. Unfortunately, a lack of chronologic control has made it difficult to interpret the results of these studies. Detailed reexamination of stratigraphy, paleomagnetics and tephrostratigraphy reveals a relatively complete marine isotope stage (MIS) 6 to Holocene record constrained by the Old Crow (124 ± 10 ka), VT (106 ± 10 ka), Sheep Creek-Klondike (ca. 80 ka), Dominion Creek (77 ± 8 ka) and Dawson (ca. 30.2 cal ka BP) tephras. Two well-developed paleosols are shown to have formed during Marine Isotope Stages (MIS) 5e and 5a, while MIS 5c and 5b are either poorly represented or absent. A magnetic excursion is identified as the post-Blake excursion (94.1 ± 7.8 ka) and provides independent age control while adding to an increasing body of evidence that Alaskan loess is a detailed recorder of variations of the Earth’s magnetic field over time. High-resolution magnetic susceptibility profiles placed into this new chronostratigraphic framework help refine loess deposition models for the interior of Alaska, while providing a means to correlate to previous magnetic studies at this site. The profiles support the hypothesis that wind-intensity is the main variable controlling fluctuations in susceptibility, with the highest susceptibility during peak glacial times and the lowest values in paleosols representing interglacials. However, the correlation of the susceptibility record to global marine d18O records is complicated by highly variable accumulation rates. We find the lowest rates of accumulation during peak warm and cold stages, while abrupt increases are associated with periods of transition between marine isotope stages, represented by intermediate susceptibility values. Previous accumulation models for Alaska have emphasized the role of surface roughness as an important variable controlling loess accumulation. However our results suggest that while this may be the case during transitions and peak cold periods, the negligible accumulation during the peak warmth of MIS 5e and 5a suggests loess production was exceedingly low, negating the role of surface roughness.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86672", "section":"Geomagnetism and Paleomagnetism"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86673" } }
{"authors":"Shinwoo Kim::Seoul National University--", "title":"NG33A-1849: A study on the background error covariance for reduced-rank retrospective optimal interpolation with WRF", "abstract":"This study presents the investigation of the background error covariance for reduced-rank retrospective optimal interpolation (reduced-rank ROI). Retrospective optimal interpolation (ROI) algorithm which assimilates observations over the analysis window for variance-minimum estimate of an atmospheric state at the initial time of the analysis window is suggested in Song et al. (2009). The assimilation window of ROI is gradually increased. Song and Lim (2011) suggested reduced-rank ROI improved by incorporating eigen-decomposition and covariance inflation. In this study, the background error covariance for reduced-rank ROI algorithm is investigated with Weather Research and Forecasting model (WRF). Reduced-rank ROI is applied by incorporating eigen-decomposition of background error covariance from ensemble. The structure of the background error covariance is investigated from each eigenvectors. The data assimilation experiments with reduced-rank ROI are based on Observing System Simulation Experiments (OSSE). A regularly dense network, a regularly sparse network, and irregularly realistic network are used for observation networks. It is assumed that all observations are located at the model grid points. Analysis error with reduced-rank ROI decreases significantly. Vertical profiles of background error and analysis error shows overall analysis error reduction.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86673", "section":"Nonlinear Geophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86674" } }
{"authors":"Christian Alarcon::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Thomas Huang::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Joe Roberts::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Joshua Rodriguez::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Nga Quach::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Cristina De Cesare::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Jeffrey Hall::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"IN31C-1783: Data Management System Reuse for Visualization of JPL’s SMAP Project", "abstract":"The Imagery Exchange (TIE) is a scalable and efficient imagery data management system that powers the WMS web server OnEarth. Designed and developed at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), TIE’s primary purpose was to power the NASA’s Global Imagery Browse Services (GIBS), a system that provides full resolution imagery from a broad set of Earth science disciplines to the public. The SMAP project at JPL had just about all of its requirements met with GIBS but required very project-specific behavior and automation for the Cal-Val phase of the project. Thanks to the extendable design of TIE (already an extension of JPL’s Horizon framework) and Amazon’s GovCloud services, we were able to meet the needs of the project without any rewrite of the system while significantly expanding the capabilities of an already robust system through well modularized feature additions. In this presentation, we will talk about the efforts made to re-use the already developed data system TIE for SMAP with minimal turn around. Leveraging cloud resources and standard interfaces, we were able to satisfy new project requirements in a very short amount of time.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86674", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86675" } }
{"authors":"Gema Cano::Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico--Irma Gavilán::Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico--Jose Agustin Garcia-Reynoso::Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico--Elvira Santos::Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico--Alejandra Mendoza::Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico--Bryan Perea::Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico--", "title":"ED21C-0841: Ozone layer depletion simulation in an Environmental Chemistry course.", "abstract":"The reactions taking place between the ozone (O3) and various compounds present in the stratosphere has been studied extensively. When the balance between these reactions breakdown, destruction of ozone is favored. Here we create an experiment for and Environmental Chemistry laboratory course where students evaluate the ozone behavior by comparing its reactivity to various physical and chemical conditions; and observe the destruction of ozone by the action of halogenated compounds by means of volumetric technic. The conditions used are: (1) Ozone vs. Time; (2) Ozone + UV vs. Time; (3) Ozone + halogenated compound vs. Time; and (4) Ozone + UV + halogenated compound vs. Time. The results show that the O3 breaks down rapidly within about 25 min (Fig). They also explain the chemical reactions that occur in the destruction and generation of the ozone layer and demonstrate ozone depletion through the presence of halogenated compounds. The aim of this work is to bring the knowledge gained from theory into practice and thus the possibility of developing a critical attitude towards various environmental problems that arise today.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86675", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86676" } }
{"authors":"Elise Myers::Princeton University--Roger Summons::MIT Lincoln Laboratory--Florence Schubotz::Massachusetts Inst of Tech--Emily Matys::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--", "title":"B33B-0664: Exploring ancient microbial community assemblages by creating complex lipid biomarker profiles for stromatolites and microbial mats in Hamelin Pool, Shark Bay, Australia", "abstract":"Stromatolites that are biogenic in origin, a characteristic that can be determined by the coexistence of microbial mats (active microbial communities) and stromatolites (lithified structures) like in Hamelin Pool, comprise one of the best modern analogs to ancient microbial community assemblages. Comprehensive lipid biomarker profiles that include lipids of varying persistence in the rock record can help determine how previously living microbial communities are represented in lithified stromatolites. To create these profiles, the samples analyzed included non-lithified smooth, pustular, and colloform microbial mats, as well as smooth and colloform stromatolites. Select samples were separated into upper and lower layers of 5cm depth each. Intact polar lipids, glycerol dialkyl glycerol tetraethers, and bacteriohopanepolyols were analyzed via liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) coupled to a Quadropole Time-of-Flight (QTOF) mass spectrometer; additionally, fatty acids from each sample were analyzed using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) to prove consistent signatures with those determined by Allen et al. in 2010 for similar microbial mat samples. In accordance with those findings, 2-methylhopanoids were detected, as well as limited signals from higher (vascular) plants, the latter of which suggests terrestrial inputs, potentially from runoff. The rarely detected presence of 3-methylhopanoids appears in a significant portion of the samples, though further isolations of the molecule are needed to confirm. While all lipid profiles were relatively similar, certain differences in relative composition are likely attributable to morphological differences of the mats, some of which allow deeper oxygen and/or sunlight penetration, which influence the microbial community. However, overall similarities of transient and persistent lipids suggest that the microbial communities of both the non-lithified microbial mats and stromatolites are similar.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86676", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86677" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"NH23C-1907: Fragility of Floating Docks for Small Craft Marinas", "abstract":"Because of the damage resulting from the 2010 Chile and 2011 Japanese tele-tsunamis, damage to the small craft marinas in California has become an important concern. This paper will explain the methodology and results used to simulate the demand and also the structural capacity of the floating dock system, composed of floating docks, fingers and moored vessels during tsunami events. The intent is to develop a predictive tool to understand the vulnerability of California’s small craft harbors to tsunami events. To validate the methodology, the probabilistic model will be applied to Santa Cruz Harbor. Maps of maximum velocity and mean current direction from the 2011 Japan tsunami have been developed using a numerical model. Cleat and pile guide locations will be recorded and georeferenced from aerial images before the event. The fragility curves for each dock/finger system will be compared with damage reports and aerial images from just after the tsunami event. A discussion of how the fragility curves compare with the damage reports will be included. It is anticipated that these curves will be useful to marina operators to use as a tool to determine where rehabilitation might be necessary to mitigate some of the damage from the next event. Conclusions will focus on how results can be used by marina operators to reduce harbor vulnerability to tsunamis.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86677", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86678" } }
{"authors":"Feng Qiu::Argonne National Laboratory--Jianhui Wang::Argonne National Laboratory--", "title":"GC31E-1246: Power System Operations With Water Constraints", "abstract":"The interdependency between water and energy, although known for many decades, has not received enough attention until recent events under extreme weather conditions (especially droughts). On one hand, water and several types of energy supplies have become increasingly scarce; the demand on water and energy continues to grow. On the other hand, the climate change has become more and more disruptive (i.e., intensity and frequency of extreme events), causing severe challenges to both systems simultaneously. Water and energy systems have become deeply coupled and challenges from extreme weather events must be addressed in a coordinated way across the two systems.In this work, we will build quantitative models to capture the interactions between water and energy systems. We will incorporate water constraints in power system operations and study the impact of water scarcity on power system resilience.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86678", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86679" } }
{"authors":"Bengu Akyurek::University of California San Diego--Jan Kleissl::Univ of California, San Diego--", "title":"A51I-0197: Analytical Exact Solution of the Cloud Thickness and Inversion Height Time Evolution for the Mixed Layer Model", "abstract":"Various schemes based on numerical and simulation methods exist in the literature that describe the evolution of stratocumulus clouds over land under a mixed layer model (MLM) assumption. Although it is possible to obtain sensitivity and time evolution results through multiple simulations, the obtained dependency is only an approximation to the underlying physical phenomena. In order to mitigate the disadvantages of these methods, we have derived the exact analytical solution of the MLM differential equations, in closed-form. An analytical, closed-form expression has many advantages: exact expression for the cloud dissipation time and how it relates to the climate conditions, sensitivity and time evolution of any parameter, time constant of the climate and the effect of the initial conditions on the time evolution; are some of the advantages of an analytical exact solution. We first couple the MLM, which solves the boundary layer mass, heat and moisture budget equations, with an equation that relates the cloud thickness tendency to the budget equations. We utilize the total moisture and liquid potential temperature within the boundary layer as the conserved variables. For the radiative effects, we used a temperature dependent longwave radiation scheme and a solar zenith angle dependent, Delta-Eddington approximation based shortwave scheme. Entrainment velocity is parametrized as a function of the buoyancy flux within the cloud layer, whereas the land surface flux is parametrized based on the net surface radiation. Utilizing the described physical phenomena, we obtain closed-form analytical expression for the time evolution of the cloud thickness. To solve the various differential equations, we only use mathematical approximations, not physical approximations. Furthermore, using the cloud thickness evolution solution, we trace our derivation steps back to investigate the evolution of the other variables involved in the process such as the conserved variables, entrainment velocity and inversion height structure. We believe that the analytical solution will help us understand, in a broader perspective, the sensitivity of the cloud thickness towards all parameters governed within the process.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86679", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86680" } }
{"authors":"Dax Matthews::University of Hawaii at Manoa--", "title":"GC53D-1241: Developing and testing solar irradiance forecasting techniques in the Hawaiian Islands region", "abstract":"The Hawaiʻi Natural Energy Institute (HNEI) is developing an operational solar forecasting for the Hawaiian Islands. The system comprises the following three components, covering forecasting horizons from seconds to days ahead. (i) A ground-observation driven advection model, using sky imagery and cloud height data. (ii) A satellite-image based advection model, primarily driven by Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) imagery. (iii) A coupled ocean-atmosphere model, using the Regional Ocean Modeling System (ROMS) model and the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model, including newly available microphysics, shallow convection parameterization, and radiative transfer physics options. The satellite and NWP components provide coverage for the entire island chain, however, lack the resolution in time and space, to accurately forecast ramp events (large changes in irradiance that occur over a short period of time). Knowledge of the magnitude, duration and timing of ramp events are particularly important in Hawaiʻi due to the small size of the electric grids. Currently, HNEI employs a sky imager and ceilometer installed on the University of Hawaiʻi campus for high resolution forecasting, however, instrument design and cost limit widespread deployment. We discuss the development and preliminary validation of a new forecasting system based on inexpensive, panoramic (large FOV), off-the-shelf cameras with a cloud base height retrieval algorithm that does not require additional instrumentation. ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86680", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86681" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"ED54B-05: Rocks usually shake when they break, but sometimes they don't (Seismic and aseismic slip of oceanic strike-slip earthquakes)", "abstract":"Rocks make waves and shake when they break along faults, but sometimes the fault sides move along without making waves and shaking. We don't know what controls this, but it could be what the rocks are made of, how hot they are, how much they are pressed from above, how often they move, or how fast they are moved by one another. Straight-down faults under water are usually younger and more simple than straight-down faults on land, so it is easier to tell what might make one part of the fault break and shake and one part of the fault move without shaking. There are also a lot more under water faults than land faults, so we don't have to wait around for a large one on land to break. That could cause a lot of serious problems and deaths, and we want to understand where it will break so we can warn people.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86681", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86682" } }
{"authors":"Caitlin Augustin::University of Miami--", "title":"PA33B-2190: The value of superpower-submitted INDCs in cooperative and non-cooperative action scenarios: economic impact, dynamic risk, and temperature rise", "abstract":"As the 2015 Paris climate talks near, policy discussions are focused on “intended nationally determined contributions” (INDCs) submitted in advance of the discussions. As the major global emitters – specifically the United States and China – have already submitted their INDCs, we have a point of comparison for evaluating the relative potential impacts of the proposed targets. By applying integrated assessment models to robust, publicly available data sets,we aim to evaluate the interplay between climate change and economic development, comment on emissions reduction scenarios in cooperative and non-cooperative situations, and assess the dynamic risks of multiple regional emissions scenarios. We use both the RICE model and the C-ROADS model to examine alternative regional outcomes for emissions, climate change, and damages,under different reduction scenarios, including a scenario where geo-engineering plays a prominent role. These simulators allow us to vary emissions, population, and economic levels in China and the United States specifically to comment on the international climate risk impact of actors working jointly – or not – toward a global climate goal. In a complementary piece of analysis we seek to understand the value judgments, trade-offs, and regional policies that would lead to favorable climate finance flows. To reach an international sample of industry decision-makers, we propose a novel application of a standard discrete-choice survey methodology. A conjoint analysis requires a participant to chose between combinations of attributes and identify trade-offs while allowing the researcher to determine the relative importance of each individual attribute by mathematically assessing the impact each attribute could have on total item utility. As climate policy negotiations will consist of allocation of scarce resources and rejection of certain attributes, a conjoint analysis is an ideal tool for evaluating policy outcomes. This research program seeks to provide a commentary useful to policy makers on the most desirable outcomes of the negotiations and other international cooperation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86682", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86683" } }
{"authors":"Neal Scott::Queen's University--Amy Blaser::Queen's University--Emma Buckley::Queen's University--Elyn Humphreys::Carleton University--Paul Treitz::Queen's University--", "title":"B33G-05: Variation in Factors Regulating Net Greenhouse Gas Exchange Across Different Vegetation Types at Cape Bounty, Melville Island, Nunavut", "abstract":"Global-scale climate simulations predict significant changes both in temperature and moisture regimes in the high Arctic. This could lead to changes in vegetation community distribution, as vegetation communities are distributed along moisture gradients often determined by snowfall patterns across the landscape. Furthermore, changes in soil moisture and temperature could alter fluxes of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O), and the impacts of changes in these controlling factors could vary by vegetation type. We measured both spatial and temporal variation in CO2 fluxes using combinations of eddy covariance, auto-chamber, and static chamber techniques at the Cape Bounty Arctic Watershed Observatory (CBAWO). Measurements were performed in three major plant community types: polar semi-desert (PSD), mid-moisture tundra (MM) and wet sedge meadow (WS). Based on our auto-chamber data collected in all vegetation types, ecosystem respiration (ER) related positively to air temperature, and correlated more strongly with air temperature than soil temperature. Modeled ER based on eddy covariance data and air temperature over MM agreed well with measured ER in the same vegetation type. In the WS community, average net ecosystem exchange (NEE) in 2014 measured by static chambers differed in spectrally separable ‘wet’ and ‘dry’ sedge areas (-0.33 and 0.01 µmol m-2 s-1, respectively; p<0.001). Rates of ER also varied across this moisture gradient (p<0.05). Over the entire growing season and multiple years, NEE correlated poorly with air and soil temperature, suggesting that ER is not the dominant processes driving NEE. This can vary, however, over the growing season. In PSD communities measured in 2013, air temperature related positively to NEE early in the growing season, but not during the latter part of the season, when PAR (photosynthesis) became the key factor controlling NEE. Not surprisingly, NEE related strongly (0.93) to vegetation cover during this latter part of the growing season. Our results suggest critical differences in both the type and timing of key factors that control NEE across High-Arctic landscapes, suggesting simple models based on one vegetation type may not accurately predict the response of these landscapes to changes in climate.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86683", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86684" } }
{"authors":"Yu-Chi Chen::Department of Earth Sciences, National Taiwan Normal University--Horng-Sheng Mii::Department of Earth Sciences, National Taiwan Normal University--Kuang-ti Li::Academia Sinica--", "title":"PP13C-2300: Oxygen Isotope Records in Modern Oyster Shells from Chi Ku, Tainan and Their Implication of Seasonality", "abstract":"To exam whether oxygen isotope records of Crassostrea gigasoysters can be used as proxies of environment, 133 cultivated oysters and 21 water samples were collected from Chi Ku area, Tainan City, southern Taiwan in December of 2012, and from March, 2013 to July, 2014. Instrumental air and water temperatures and precipitation records were obtained from a nearest Central Weather Bureau (CWB) station roughly 16 km north of Chi Ku. The oxygen and carbon isotope values of the ligamental area of the modern oyster shells are from -6.92‰ to -0.08‰ (-3.05 ± 1.17‰, N = 2280; 1σ; VPDB) and from -5.57‰ to 0.63‰ (-1.88 ± 0.81‰), respectively. Oxygen isotope values of the water samples are mainly between -0.28‰ and 0.74‰ (0.18 ± 0.29‰, N = 20; 1σ; VSMOW). However, water oxygen isotope value of -2.75‰ was observed for the water sample collected immediately after a typhoon heavy rainfall. Seasonal temperature fluctuation pattern of estimated oxygen isotope temperatures from modern shells is similar to that of CWB instrumental records. However, the oxygen isotope temperatures are respectively about 3 °C and 10°C higher than those of instrumental records for winter and summer. Higher estimated oxygen isotope temperatures are most likely caused by underestimated fraction of freshwater. We analyzed 5 archaeological oyster shells of Siraya culture (500~250B.P.) collected from Wu Chien Tuso North (WCTN) archaeological site of Tainan branch of Southern Taiwan Science Park to infer the harvest season of mollusks. Oxygen isotope values of the ligamental area of the archaeological oyster shells are between -5.98‰ and -1.26‰ (-3.34 ± 1.37‰, N = 60; 1σ), and carbon isotope values are between -3.21‰ and 0.60‰ (-2.04‰ ± 0.55‰). The oxygen isotope records of archaeological oyster shells also showed clear seasonality. Most of the oysters were collected in autumn and winter. Oxygen isotope values of archaeological oyster shells was 1‰ greater than that of present for summer whereas was 1.2‰ less than that of present for wintwr. Assuming the temperature of 500-300 B.P. in Tainan was similar to that of present, it may indicate that the precipitation was weaker in summer but heavier in winter in southern Taiwan 500-300 B.P.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86684", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86685" } }
{"authors":"Laura Belica::North Carolina State University Raleigh--Peter Caldwell::US Forest Service--Helena Mitasova::North Carolina State Univ--James McCarter::North Carolina State University at Raleigh--Jordan Smith::North Carolina State University--Stacy Nelson::North Carolina State University Raleigh--", "title":"GC51E-1138: Investigation of the Relative Effects of Insolation, Groundwater, and Spatial Variability in Temperature Dynamics of Two Headwater Streams", "abstract":"Forested headwater streams account for much of the aquatic species diversity and contribute valuable recreational fisheries in the mountains of the Southeastern United States. Stream temperature is key regulator of headwater ecosystems and thermal regime is such a critical factor that it limits where many species can survive, grow, and successfully reproduce. Forested headwater streams are dynamic systems located in complex terrain. The variability of heat exchange between a stream and its surroundings results in thermal variations along its course. Understanding the spatial variability of heat fluxes along headwater streams is important to understanding the thermal dynamics and their effects on the biota. Solar radiation and groundwater inflow are two primary components of the heat budget of headwater streams and are spatially variable over short distances. A comparative analysis of north-facing and south-facing watersheds the Coweeta Basin of the Southern Appalachian Mountains found that temperatures of north-facing streams were cooler than south-facing streams for most of the year, but were warmer in summer. A north-south watershed pair with similar discharge, drainage areas, elevation, slope, and landcover characteristics was selected for further study. Water temperature was monitored longitudinally from the stream origins to the outlets beginning in late 2014. Preliminary data suggested variation in solar radiation resulting from the spatial heterogeneity of evergreen and deciduous trees and seasonal changes in leaf density could explain temperature patterns. We used the Subcanopy Solar Radiation Model, which accounts for topographic and vegetative shading by using a light penetration index derived from LIDAR data, to produce spatially explicit estimates of solar radiation and elucidate spatial and temporal variations in solar radiation along the two streams. Groundwater influence on stream temperature dynamics was investigated using salt-dilution gaging methods. Combined with the longitudinal water temperature study the results were used to examine the relative influences of solar radiation and groundwater inflow, and better understand the role of spatial variation of the two heat fluxes, on the temperature dynamics of the headwater streams.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86685", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86686" } }
{"authors":"Stanley Grant::University of California Irvine--", "title":"H34F-08: From rain tanks to catchments: Use of low-impact development to address hydrologic symptoms of the urban stream syndrome", "abstract":"Catchment urbanization perturbs the water and sediment budgets of streams, degrades stream health and function, and causes a constellation of flow, water quality and ecological symptoms collectively known as the urban stream syndrome. Low-impact development (LID) technologies address the hydrologic symptoms of the urban stream syndrome by mimicking natural flow paths and restoring a natural water balance. Over annual time scales, the volumes of storm water that should be infiltrated and harvested can be estimated from a catchment-scale water-balance given local climate conditions and pre-urban land cover. For all but the wettest regions of the world, the water balance predicts a much larger volume of storm water runoff should be harvested than infiltrated to restore stream hydrology to a pre-urban state. Efforts to prevent or reverse hydrologic symptoms associated with the urban stream syndrome will therefore require: (1) selecting the right mix of LID technologies that provide regionally tailored ratios of storm water harvesting and infiltration; (2) integrating these LID technologies into next-generation drainage systems; (3) maximizing potential co-benefits including water supply augmentation, flood protection, improved water quality, and urban amenities; and (4) long-term hydrologic monitoring to evaluate the efficacy of LID interventions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86686", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86689" } }
{"authors":"Paul Edwards::Pukyong National University--Sehyeon Gwon::Pukyong National University--David Sanderson::University of Southampton--Young-Seog Kim::Pukyong National University--", "title":"T23C-2954: Defining an Effective Damage Zone from the Topological Connectivity of Deformation Bands", "abstract":"The length, intensity, and geometrical and topological characteristics of the deformation bands in the damage zone have been analysed along the length of the Bartlett Fault, Utah and through its linked section to the Moab Fault. Samples were also collected at each location for porosity and permeability analysis to understand the effect of the deformation bands on the fluid flow characteristics of the damage zone. Significant changes in deformation band density and connectivity occur along strike of the fault, creating zones of high connectivity in damage zones. The complexity of the damage zone and the connectivity of the deformation bands can change permeability along and across faults. Changes in intensity and strike of the deformation bands occur, particularly in linkage damage zones or remnant linkage damage zones. In these areas the intensity of deformation bands often increases, but in some cases decreases. To estimate fluid flow reduction around sandstone reservoirs, we define an ‘effective damage zone’, as the damage zone volume around the fault core that is topologically connected. This effective damage zone can be used to predict compartments of reduced permeability in and around the fault damage zone. We calculated the width of an effective damage zone using proportion of connecting nodes in the damage networks, and the distance from the fault at which the network is not connected. The geometry of deformation bands in the damage zone (parallel to the fault strike) results in directional differences in fluid flow reduction through the networks. Fault normal flow would be reduced significantly more than fault parallel flow if the deformation bands were connected. An increase in the proportion of deformation bands to matrix, moving towards the fault, along with increases in connectivity would result in very low fault normal permeability within the effective damage zone. Changes in fault geometry, segmentation and linkage are important controlling factors for fluid flow and strain localization depending on the evolution and interaction of the Bartlett Fault and the Moab Fault in the study area.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86689", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86690" } }
{"authors":"Shobha Sriharan::Virginia State University--Gulnihal Ozbay::Delaware State University--Laren Robinson::Virginia State University--Victoria Klimkowski::Virginia State University--", "title":"ED13A-0887: Climate Change Science Teaching through Integration of Technology in Instruction and Research", "abstract":"This presentation demonstrates the importance of collaborations between the institutions with common focus on offering the academic program on climate change science. Virginia State University (VSU) developed and established the course on climate change and adaptation, AGRI 350 for undergraduates, in cooperation with two HBCUs, Delaware State University (DSU) and Morgan State University (MSU). This program was developed to enhance the science curriculum with funding from the USDA NIFA. The hands-on research opportunities for students were supported by the NSF HBCU UP Supplement Grant at VSU. The technical guidance and lesson plans were available through the courtesy of the AMS and faculty/student team training at the NCAR. In the initial stages, the faculty members participated in faculty development workshops hosted by the AMS and NCAR. This contributed to trained faculty members developing the courses on Climate Change at VSU, DSU, and MSU. To create awareness of global climate change and exposure of students to international programs, seven students from VSU, MSU, and DSU participated in the Climate Change course (ENS 320) at the University of Sunshine Coast (USC), Australia. This international experience included faculty members in using SimCLIM for climate change data into decision-making with regard to potential changes to cropping systems and tree growth. The Climate Change program at VSU, DSU, and MSU is emerging into comprehensive academic program which includes use of case studies and exchange of students’ reflections with their peers through discussion board and videoconferencing, hands-on research on water quality monitoring and mapping the study sites, and integration of geospatial technologies and i-Tree. In addition, the students’ engagement in intensive research was conducted through hands-on experience with Scanning Electron Microscopy in the Marine Science Department, University of Hawaii at Hilo in summer 2015.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86690", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86691" } }
{"authors":"Callum Byers::University of Houston--Paul Mann::University of Houston--", "title":"T11E-2952: Tectonic geomorphology of large normal faults bounding the Cuzco rift basin within the southern Peruvian Andes", "abstract":"The Cuzco basin forms a 80-wide, relatively flat valley within the High Andes of southern Peru. This larger basin includes the regional capital of Cuzco and the Urubamba Valley, or “Sacred Valley of the Incas” favored by the Incas for its mild climate and broader expanses of less rugged and arable land. The valley is bounded on its northern edge by a 100-km-long and 10-km-wide zone of down-to-the-south systems of normal faults that separate the lower area of the down-dropped plateau of central Peru and the more elevated area of the Eastern Cordillera foldbelt that overthrusts the Amazon lowlands to the east. Previous workers have shown that the normal faults are dipslip with up to 600 m of measured displacements, reflect north-south extension, and have Holocene displacments with some linked to destructive, historical earthquakes. We have constructed topographic and structural cross sections across the entire area to demonstrate the normal fault on a the plateau peneplain. The footwall of the Eastern Cordillera, capped by snowcapped peaks in excess of 6 km, tilts a peneplain surface northward while the hanging wall of the Cuzco basin is radially arched. Erosion is accelerated along the trend of the normal fault zone. As the normal fault zone changes its strike from east-west to more more northwest-southeast, normal displacement decreases and is replaced by a left-lateral strike-slip component.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86691", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86692" } }
{"authors":"Segun Ogunjemiyo::California State University Fresno--Alam Hasson::California State University Fresno--Shawn Ashkan::California State University Fresno--Julie Steele::California State University Fresno--Thomas Shelton::Texas State University San Marcos--", "title":"A21A-0071: Analysis of Ozone And CO2 Profiles Measured At A Diary Facility", "abstract":"Ozone and carbon dioxide are both greenhouse gasses in the planetary boundary layer. Ozone is a harmful secondary pollutant in the troposphere produced mostly during the day when there is a photochemical reaction in which primary pollutant precursors such as nitrous oxide (NOx) or volatile organic compounds (VOC’s) mix with sunlight. As with most pollutants in the lower troposphere, both ozone and carbon dioxide vary in spatial and temporal scale depending on sources of pollution, environmental conditions and the boundary layer dynamics. Among the several factors that influence ozone variation, the seasonal changes in meteorological parameters and availability of ozone precursors are crucial because they control ozone formation and decay. Understanding how the difference in emission sources affect vertical transport of ozone and carbon dioxide is considered crucial to the improvement of their regional inventory sources. The purpose of this study is to characterize vertical transport of ozone and carbon at a diary facility. The study was conducted in the summer of 2011 and 2012 at a commercial dairy facility in Central California and involved profile measurements of ozone and CO2 using electrochemical ozonesondes, meteorological sondes and CO2 probe tethered to a 9 cubic meters helium balloon. On each day of the data collection, multiple balloon launches were made over a period representing different stages of the boundary layer development. The results show ozone and CO2 profiles display different characteristics. Regardless of the time of the day, the CO2 concentration decreases with height with a sharp gradient near the surface that is strengthened by a stable atmospheric condition, a feature suggesting the surface as the source. On the other hand, ozone profiles show greater link to the evolution of the lower boundary layer. Ozone profiles display unique features indicating ozone destruction near the surface. This unusual near the surface, observed even in the afternoon when the boundary layer is fully developed, greatly contrast ozone profiles are typical of urban environment", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86692", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86693" } }
{"authors":"Riley Brady::University of South Carolina Columbia--Ryan Rykaczewski::University of South Carolina--Michael Alexander::NOAA Boulder--", "title":"OS22A-08: The Influence of Natural Variability on Future California Current Upwelling", "abstract":"Upwelling in the California Current sustains a productive ecosystem and is largely mediated by the cross-shore, atmospheric pressure gradient that develops during the boreal summer. This pressure gradient may be intensified through increased warming of the continent relative to the Pacific Ocean, resulting in accelerated alongshore winds and amplified coastal upwelling (a concept known as the Bakun Hypothesis). Past attempts to investigate the Bakun Hypothesis have utilized multi-model “ensembles-of-opportunity” to examine the response of upwelling to climate change. However, attempts to distinguish anthropogenic changes relative to natural climate variability are limited, largely because model divergences present in an ensemble-of-opportunity include both natural variability and inter-model variability (i.e., the differing response of each model to identical radiative forcing). To address this concern, modeling centers are developing “large ensembles” consisting of numerous, independent model runs separated only by round-off differences in their initial atmospheric state. Differences between these runs are void of inter-model variability, allowing disparities between runs to be attributed entirely to natural variability within the system. Using output from the CESM1 Large Ensemble, we consider the influence of anthropogenic activity—relative to natural climate variability—on the future seasonality, extent, and amplitude of upwelling in the California Current. Here we show that minor perturbations in the initial atmosphere significantly alter the influence of natural variability on the system. Furthermore, we expect change to vary both seasonally and meridionally, following trends of enhanced and weakened upwelling conditions. Finally, upwelling is expected to follow a complex path, rather than increasing linearly. Our results demonstrate the importance of considering upwelling conditions over varying scales of space and time, as quite different patterns emerged over differing seasons and portions of the coastline. More strikingly, natural variability seems to play a larger role than anticipated in impacting the direction and intensity of change in the system.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86693", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86694" } }
{"authors":"Bethany Ehlmann::California Institute of Technology--Peter Martin::California Institute of Technology--Diana Blaney::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Rohit Bhartia::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Abigail Allwood::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"P31A-2033: Outcrop-Scale Hyperspectral Studies of a Lacustrine-Volcanic Mars Analog: Examination with a Mars 2020-like Instrument Suite", "abstract":"Using the recently developed Ultra Compact Imaging Spectrometer (UCIS) (0.4-2.5 µm) to generate outcrop-scale infrared images and compositional maps, a Mars-relevant field site near China Ranch in the Mojave Desert has been surveyed and sampled to analyze the synergies between instruments in the Mars 2020 rover instrument suite. The site is broadly comprised of large lacustrine gypsum beds with fine-grained gypsiferous mudstones and interbedded volcanic ashes deposited in the Pleistocene, with a carbonate unit atop the outcrop. Alteration products such as clays and iron oxides are pervasive throughout the sequence. Mineralogical mapping of the outcrop was performed using UCIS. As the 2020 rover will have an onboard multispectral camera and IR point spectrometer, Mastcam-Z and SuperCam, this process of spectral analysis leading to the selection of sites for more detailed investigation is similar to the process by which samples will be selected for increased scrutiny during the 2020 mission. The infrared image is resampled (spatially and spectrally) to the resolutions of Mastcam-Z and SuperCam to simulate data from the Mars 2020 rover. Hand samples were gathered in the field (guided by the prior infrared compositional mapping), capturing samples of spectral and mineralogical variance in the scene. After collection, a limited number of specimens were chosen for more detailed analysis. The hand samples are currently being analyzed using JPL prototypes of the Mars 2020 arm-mounted contact instruments, specifically PIXL (Planetary Instrument for X-ray Lithochemistry) and SHERLOC (Scanning Habitable Environments with Raman & Luminescence). The geologic story as told by the Mars 2020 instrument data will be analyzed and compared to the full suite of data collected by hyperspectral imaging and terrestrial techniques (e.g. XRD) applied to the collected hand samples. This work will shed light on the potential uses and synergies of the Mars 2020 instrument suite, especially with regards to spectral (i.e. remote) recognition of important and interesting samples on which to do contact science.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86694", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86695" } }
{"authors":"Jorge Núñez::Applied Physics Laboratory Johns Hopkins--Nathan Bridges::Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory--Frank Seelos::JHU APL--Simon Hook::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Alice Baldridge::St. Mary's College of California--Bradley Thomson::Boston University--", "title":"P31A-2022: Mineralogy of evaporite deposits on Mars: Constraints from laboratory, field, and remote measurements of analog terrestrial acid saline lakes", "abstract":"Remote compositional data from imaging spectrometers such as CRISM, OMEGA, and TES, and high-resolution imagery from MOC, CTX, and HiRISE have provided invaluable information for improving our understanding of the composition and geologic history of the martian surface and identifying potential past and present habitable environments on Mars. Simulated CRISM spectra and summary parameter maps and HiRISE color images were generated using airborne hyperspectral data of two acid-saline lakes in Western Australia. These locations are applicable to Mars, as they contain a suite of clays, sulfates, and salts formed under variable pH and salinity - mineralogies similar to those observed in Noachian and Hesperian terrain. The remote datasets were used to make surface composition predictions which were then verified through field study and sample analysis. We find phyllosilicates intermixed with sulfates in sulfate-rich surfaces exhibit variable spectral responses, even for similar conditions and abundances seen in the field. Where sulfates, such as gypsum and alunite, are found, phyllosilicates are intermixed or reside beneath the surface yet are not always detected. This suggests that geologic complexities may mask phyllosilicate detection at or near the surface on Mars where only sulfates have so far been found.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86695", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86696" } }
{"authors":"Zofia Taranu::University of Montreal--", "title":"GC13G-1234: Using networks to detect regime changes in aquatic communities across nutrient gradients", "abstract":"Networks capture links or interactions between organisms within ecological webs. When an environmental stress occurs, rapid changes in ecosystem state are expected in food webs with highly connected networks and functionally redundant species. These networks can dissipate local disturbances quickly and provide resistance to change at first until a threshold is reached, at which point, a critical transition occurs (nodes shift in synchrony). In contrast, in low connectivity (modular) heterogeneous networks, the response in ecosystem state to an environmental stressor is gradual. Given that these ecosystem-level shifts can be difficult to predict, hard to reverse and can have undesirable consequences, there is considerable interest in identifying what type of response (gradual vs. hysteresis) is most likely in nature. In this work, we thus aimed to test for the support for a bifurcated response in aquatic ecosystem across a landscape of human impact and track which of the above scenarios was most common. More specifically, using the US EPA National Lake Assessment water quality dataset (2007 sampling), we quantified differences in food-web structures across a spatial gradient of human impact (eutrophication). Preliminary results indicate that certain network properties vary nonlinearly with respect to nutrient enrichment.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86696", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86697" } }
{"authors":"Xueqin Zhang::IGSNRR Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research, CAS--Yuan Tian::--Rui Sun::--", "title":"G33B-1144: Lake surface area variation and its responses to climatic change in Yamzhog Yumco Basin, South Tibet during 1970-2010", "abstract":"The research on lake extraction from multi-source and multi-temporal satellite images and the lake size variation can provide reliable method and indispensable information to deepen the understanding about alpine lake changes with the accelerating warming. With field survey experience in the Yamzhog Yumco Basin, South Tibet, the outlines of five lakes (i.e., Yamzhog Yumco, Chen Co, Kongmu Co, Bajiu Co and Puma Yumco) were delineated by the adoption of 42 scenes of satellite images from Landsat, CBERS and HJ from 1970 to 2010, basing on which the responses of alpine lakes to climate change at different timescales were explored. The results are summarized as follows. (1) The seasonal fluctuation of lake surface area was similar with different trend for the five alpine lakes. As for the last 41 years, the annual variation of lake surface area exhibited two kinds of patterns for the five alpine lakes. And the Yamzhog Yumco declined by 9.41%, while the rest four lakes expanded. (2) The responses of alpine lakes to climate change rely on different timescale and water replenishment types. On the one hand, the precipitation change was the predominant driving forces for the seasonal fluctuation and variation trend of lake size, and the rising temperature accounted for the inter-annual lake surface variation. On the other hand, the two kinds of alpine lakes behaviors were well correspondent with the warming temperature over the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau. The lakes supplied mainly by precipitation shrunk as a result of increased evaporation, and lakes supplied mainly by glacier and snow meltwater, however, expanded because of the remarkable glacier recession. (3) The quantification of hydrological components would hopefully be improved, according to uncertainties analysis, with the adoption of microwave satellite images and higher resolution ones to disclose the interaction mechanism among climate, glacier, and lake in alpine regions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86697", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86698" } }
{"authors":"Takahiro Maeda::National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention--Hiroyuki Fujiwara::National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention--", "title":"S11A-2780: A Method to Evaluate Characteristics of Simulated Long-Period Ground Motion for Anticipated Nankai Trough Earthquakes", "abstract":"Since recent development of technologies enable us to simulate large-scale and large-number of ground motion, it is possible to not only focus on studying particular events in detail but also looking at many possible events in big picture. In this study, we apply the latter method to generate many possible source models using empirical relationships by taking into account the uncertainty of source parameter. Based on the ground motion simulation using those varieties of source model, impact by the uncertainty of source parameters on simulated ground motion can be reveal. We have simulated long-period ground motions associated with the Nankai Trough earthquakes (M8~9) in southwest Japan at about 80,000 observation sites using various characterized source models (~400 models) by giving the various dimension of source parameters such as source region, asperity configuration, and hypocenter location (Maeda et al., 2014, AGU fall meeting). Using these results, we have been investigating the relationship between simulated ground motions and source parameters for selected sites based on the seismological knowledge. However, the different approach may be applied to analyze our simulated results. As a preliminary study, we apply the k-nearest neighbor algorithm to the estimated peak amplitudes. Then we can divide the 80,000 sites into several groups that have similar relationship between the source parameters and simulations. Our future study will lead to several methods to be applied to our results and to investigate the characteristic features of simulated ground motion.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86698", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86699" } }
{"authors":"Hari Krishnan::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Surendra Byna::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Michael Wehner::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Junmin Gu::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Travis O'Brien::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Burlen Loring::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Dáithí Stone::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--William Collins::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Mr Prabhat::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Yunjie Liu::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Jeffrey Johnson::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--Christopher Paciorek::University of California--", "title":"A33A-0122: Enabling Efficient Climate Science Workflows in High Performance Computing Environments", "abstract":"A typical climate science workflow often involves a combination of acquisition of data, modeling, simulation, analysis, visualization, publishing, and storage of results. Each of these tasks provide a myriad of challenges when running on a high performance computing environment such as Hopper or Edison at NERSC. Hurdles such as data transfer and management, job scheduling, parallel analysis routines, and publication require a lot of forethought and planning to ensure that proper quality control mechanisms are in place. These steps require effectively utilizing a combination of well tested and newly developed functionality to move data, perform analysis, apply statistical routines, and finally, serve results and tools to the greater scientific community. As part of the CAlibrated and Systematic Characterization, Attribution and Detection of Extremes (CASCADE) project we highlight a stack of tools our team utilizes and has developed to ensure that large scale simulation and analysis work are commonplace and provide operations that assist in everything from generation/procurement of data (HTAR/Globus) to automating publication of results to portals like the Earth Systems Grid Federation (ESGF), all while executing everything in between in a scalable environment in a task parallel way (MPI). We highlight the use and benefit of these tools by showing several climate science analysis use cases they have been applied to.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86699", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86700" } }
{"authors":"Tian Yao::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center--Qingyuan Zhang::Universities Space Research Association Greenbelt--", "title":"B43E-0606: Estimation of Carbon Fluxes from MODIS fAPARchl Product", "abstract":"In previous research studies, a common way to estimate the gross primary production (GPP) is to use the fraction of photosynthetically radiation (PAR) absorbed by vegetation (FPAR) and leaf area index (LAI). However, only the PAR absorbed by chlorophyll of the canopy, not the PAR absorbed by the foliage or by the entire canopy, is used for photosynthesis. MODIS fAPARchl product, which refers to the fraction of PAR absorbed by chlorophyll of the canopy, is derived from Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) surface reflectance by using a canopy-leaf radiative transfer model PROSAIL2. In this study, MODIS fAPARchl product has been used to estimate carbon fluxes in selected flux tower sites over different kinds of vegetation types including cropland, deciduous broadleaf forest, evergreen needle-leaf forest, mixed forest and grassland. The results show that MODIS fAPARchl product has the ability to better characterize phenology than current phenology model in the Community Land Model (CLM4.5) in Community Earth System Model (CESM 1.2), and it also will likely be able to increase accuracy of carbon fluxes simulations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86700", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86701" } }
{"authors":"Katie Taladay::University of Hawaii at Manoa--Brian Boston::University of Hawaii at Manoa--", "title":"OS22B-06: Gas in Place Resource Assessment for Concentrated Hydrate Deposits in the Kumano Forearc Basin, Offshore Japan, from NanTroSEIZE and 3D Seismic Data", "abstract":"Natural gas hydrates (NGHs) are crystalline inclusion compounds that form within the pore spaces of marine sediments along continental margins worldwide. It has been proposed that these NGH deposits are the largest dynamic reservoir of organic carbon on this planet, yet global estimates for the amount of gas in place (GIP) range across several orders of magnitude. Thus there is a tremendous need for climate scientists and countries seeking energy security to better constrain the amount of GIP locked up in NGHs through the development of rigorous exploration strategies and standardized reservoir characterization methods. This research utilizes NanTroSEIZE drilling data from International Ocean Drilling Program (IODP) Sites C0002 and C0009 to constrain 3D seismic interpretations of the gas hydrate petroleum system in the Kumano Forearc Basin. We investigate the gas source, fluid migration mechanisms and pathways, and the 3D distribution of prospective HCZs. There is empirical and interpretive evidence that deeply sourced fluids charge concentrated NGH deposits just above the base of gas hydrate stability (BGHS) appearing in the seismic data as continuous bottoms simulating reflections (BSRs). These HCZs cover an area of 11 by 18 km, range in thickness between 10 – 80 m with an average thickness of 40 m, and are analogous to the confirmed HCZs at Daini Atsumi Knoll in the eastern Nankai Trough where the first offshore NGH production trial was conducted in 2013. For consistency, we calculated a volumetric GIP estimate using the same method employed by Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corporation (JOGMEC) to estimate GIP in the eastern Nankai Trough. Double BSRs are also common throughout the basin, and BGHS modeling along with drilling indicators for gas hydrates beneath the primary BSRs provides compelling evidence that the double BSRs reflect a BGHS for structure-II methane-ethane hydrates beneath a structure-I methane hydrate phase boundary. Additional drilling data would be needed to confirm the validity of this assessment, but the implications are that stacked NGH deposits could be common and unaccounted for in NGH reserve estimates.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86701", "section":"Ocean Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86702" } }
{"authors":"Fernanda Ribeiro::University of California Santa Barbara--Dar Roberts::University of California--Frank Davis::University of California Santa Barbara--Janet Nackoney::University of Maryland College Park--Gabriel Antunes Daldegan::University of California--", "title":"EP53A-0980: Mapping the Cerrado vegetation classes using Rapid Eye imagery", "abstract":"The Cerrado biome is a world’s important biodiversity hotspot. Its natural vegetation is being severely converted by agriculture and pasture, with a large risk to be reduced into small fragments. The Cerrado is the second largest biome of South America and is considered the most floristically diverse savanna in the world. Its vegetation is divided into three major physiognomies: grassland, forest and savanna. The main objective of this study is to classify the major vegetation classes of the Cerrado and its converted areas. A very common issue faced by scientists when using remote sensing to map the Cerrado’s vegetation is finding some confusion between the vegetation and the converted areas. It is believed that satellites with a finer spatial resolution would help improve the classification of this biome. In order to test this hypothesis, we have selected the RapidEye 3A imagery for the year 2012 to use in this work. Decision Trees method were tested in this work to classify the vegetation classes with an effective result. Mapping the Cerrado classes and its converted areas is very important to understand and develop studies to monitor its land use change and prioritize areas for conservation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86702", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86704" } }
{"authors":"Yongqin Jiao::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--Dan Park::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--David Reed::Idaho National Lab--Yoshiko Fujita::Idaho National Laboratory--Mimi Yung::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--Andre Anderko::OLI Systems, Inc.--Ali Eslamimanesh::OLI Systems, Inc.--", "title":"B21C-0451: Bacterial Cell Surface Adsorption of Rare Earth Elements", "abstract":"Rare earth elements (REE) play a critical role in many emerging clean energy technologies, including high-power magnets, wind turbines, solar panels, hybrid/electric vehicle batteries and lamp phosphors. In order to sustain demand for such technologies given current domestic REE shortages, there is a need to develop new approaches for ore processing/refining and recycling of REE-containing materials. To this end, we have developed a microbially-mediated bioadsorption strategy with application towards enrichment of REE from complex mixtures. Specifically, the bacterium Caulobacter crescentus was genetically engineered to display lanthanide binding tags (LBTs), short peptides that possess high affinity and specificity for rare earth elements, on its cell surface S-layer protein. Under optimal conditions, LBT-displayed cells adsorbed greater than 5-fold more REE than control cells lacking LBTs. Competition binding experiments with a selection of REEs demonstrated that our engineered cells could facilitate separation of light- from heavy- REE. Importantly, binding of REE onto our engineered strains was much more favorable compared to non-REE metals. Finally, REE bound to the cell surface could be stripped off using citrate, providing an effective and non-toxic REE recovery method. Together, this data highlights the potential of our approach for selective REE enrichment from REE containing mixtures.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86704", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86705" } }
{"authors":"Amir Caspi::Southwest Research Institute Boulder--Albert Shih::NASA GSFC--Harry Warren::Naval Research Lab DC--Craig DeForest::Southwest Research Institute--Thomas Woods::Univ Colorado--", "title":"SH13B-2444: New Instruments for Spectrally-Resolved Solar Soft X-ray Observations from CubeSats, and Larger Missions", "abstract":"Solar soft X-ray (SXR) observations provide important diagnostics of plasma heating, during solar flares and quiescent times. Spectrally- and temporally-resolved measurements are crucial for understanding the dynamics and evolution of these energetic processes; spatially-resolved measurements are critical for understanding energy transport. A better understanding of the thermal plasma informs our interpretation of hard X-ray (HXR) observations of nonthermal particles, improving our understanding of the relationships between particle acceleration, plasma heating, and the underlying release of magnetic energy during reconnection. We introduce a new proposed mission, the CubeSat Imaging X-ray Solar Spectrometer (CubIXSS), to measure spectrally- and spatially-resolved SXRs from the quiescent and flaring Sun from a 6U CubeSat platform in low-Earth orbit during a nominal 1-year mission. CubIXSS includes the Amptek X123-SDD silicon drift detector, a low-noise, commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) instrument enabling solar SXR spectroscopy from ~0.5 to ~30 keV with ~0.15 keV FWHM spectral resolution with low power, mass, and volume requirements. An X123-CdTe cadmium-telluride detector is also included for ~5-100 keV HXR spectroscopy with ~0.5-1 keV FWHM resolution. CubIXSS also includes a novel spectro-spatial imager -- the first ever solar imager on a CubeSat -- utilizing a pinhole aperture and X-ray transmission diffraction grating to provide full-Sun imaging from ~0.1 to ~10 keV, with ~25 arcsec and ~0.1 Å FWHM spatial and spectral resolutions, respectively. We discuss scaled versions of these instruments, with greater sensitivity and dynamic range, and significantly improved spectral and spatial resolutions for the imager, for deployment on larger platforms such as Small Explorer missions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86705", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86706" } }
{"authors":"David Auerbach::Yale University--Michael Hren::University of Connecticut--Astrid Pacini::Yale University--Paige Breen::Yale University--", "title":"PP11B-2247: A terrestrial record of water isotopes reveals the Eocene-Oligoene transition in southern Argentina", "abstract":"The Eocene-Oligocene transition (EOT) from a greenhouse to icehouse climate state and the onset of large-scale Antarctic glaciation has been widely documented geochemically in both the marine realm (e.g., Zachos et al., 2001) and the terrestrial realm (e.g., Zanazzi et al., 2007). However, existing terrestrial records from Patagonia show negligible change in the water isotope record (Kohn et al., 2010; Kohn et al., 2015), despite the proximity of South America to Antarctica. Analyses of volcanic glasses from the Vera Member of the Sarmiento Formation in the well-dated (Dunn et al., 2013) sedimentary section at Gran Barranca allow us to reconstruct water isotope record in central Patagonia during the EOT. These data show a drop in precipitation δD of ~20‰ over ~100-200 kyr followed by a recovery of ~15‰ over the next 0.5-1.0 Myr. This pattern of a rapid shift and a more gradual recovery fits the shape and time scale of the marine record, although the magnitude of the isotopic excursion is different. Such a record could potentially be explained by large changes in source (seawater) δD, temperature, paleolatitude, or orographic effect. As the latter two possibilities are geologically improbable, these data suggest large, rapid climatic changes accompanying the EOT in Patagonia. If corroborated by other data, this would suggest that the evolution of hypsodonty in grazers in Patagonia was not driven by or sensitive to the global climate.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86706", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86707" } }
{"authors":"Kristen Rasmussen::National Center for Atmospheric Research--Stanley Trier::National Center for Atmospheric Research--", "title":"A41F-0116: Thermodynamic Environments Supporting Extreme Convection in Subtropical South America", "abstract":"Extreme convection tends to form in the vicinity of mountain ranges, and the Andes in subtropical South America help spawn some of the most intense convection in the world. Subsequent to initiation, the convection often evolves into propagating mesoscale convective systems (MCSs) similar to those seen over the U.S. Great Plains and produces damaging tornadoes, hail, and floods across a wide agricultural region. In recent years, studies on the nature of convection in subtropical South America using spaceborne radar data have elucidated key processes responsible for their extreme characteristics, including a strong relationship between the Andes topography and convective initiation. Building on previous work, an investigation of the thermodynamic environment supporting some of the deepest convection in the world will be presented. In particular, an analysis of the thermodynamic destabilization in subtropical South America, which considers the parcel buoyancy minimum for conditionally unstable air parcels, will be presented. Additional comparisons between the nocturnal nature and related diurnal cycle of MCSs in subtropical South America the U.S. Great Plains will provide insights into the processes controlling MCS initiation and upscale growth.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86707", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86708" } }
{"authors":"Kyle Fredrick::California University of Pennsylvania--", "title":"ED31B-0892: Professional Development as a critical course in an undergraduate geology curriculum", "abstract":"In today’s economy and job market, “workplace readiness” has become a popular buzzword applied to educational efficacy and worthiness. This additional attention to employment outcomes for undergraduate students adds pressure on faculty, as they come under greater scrutiny from administration and prospective students. It is an important marketing tool for programs to report their placement numbers. In our geology program at California University, even though we have had several years of successful placement of our graduates, we have struggled with student buy-in until they are seniors looking at an uncertain future. In recent years, it has become apparent that a greater proportion of our students are not prepared for university-level work when they enter college. They are unprepared for the rigors of critical thinking and quantitative analyses. A way to help them get more serious about their professional career at an earlier stage of education is to demonstrate to them what they do not know. Beginning this year, we have implemented a new, required course, Professional Development for Geologists. It is not a novel idea, in terms of design, but its application as a required course within the major and the students’ option of taking it multiple times seems to be a new approach. The course is structured to work with students to develop their skills for the job market, graduate school, and improve general professionalism.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86708", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86709" } }
{"authors":"Osamu Kuwano::JAMSTEC--Masao Nakatani::University of Tokyo--Shingo Yoshida::University of Tokyo--Makoto Uyeshima::Earthquake Research Institute--", "title":"S11A-2781: Origin of transient self-potential signals associated with very long period seismic pulses observed during the 2000 activity of Miyakejima volcano", "abstract":"Origin of the previously reported transient geoelectrical (self-potential, SP) signals in the Miyakejima 2000 activity, that repeatedly occurred concurrently with very long period (VLP) seismic pulses, was investigated. SP waveforms stacked across repeated VLP events showed a step-like rise followed by a gradual decay at all stations spread over the island of 8 km diameter. Within a realistic range of hydrological diffusivity, the short time constants of the SP signals cannot be explained by the electrokinetic effect caused by fluid flow within a limited volume, proposed earlier as a fluid injection hypothesis. On the other hand, poroelasticity predicts an island-wide distributed flow field to occur almost instantaneously upon VLP events due to the step of strain field imposed by the mechanical event. We propose that the observed SP signals resulted from the streaming current by this island-wide flow field. Our quantitative model, assuming a vertical tensile crack as a mechanical source, which has been suggested by preceding seismic studies, can explain the time constants and the amplitude of the SP signals (both spatial pattern and absolute amplitude), within a reasonable range of rock properties and the scalar moment of the mechanical source (VLP event). Location and attitude of the mechanical source were well constrained by grid search and are consistent with those estimated earlier from other types of data.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86709", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86711" } }
{"authors":"Clemens Simmer::University of Bonn--", "title":"A11E-0098: Analysis of Surface Heterogeneity Effects with Mesoscale Terrestrial Modeling Platforms", "abstract":"An improved understanding of the full variability in the weather and climate system is crucial for reducing the uncertainty in weather forecasting and climate prediction, and to aid policy makers to develop adaptation and mitigation strategies. A yet unknown part of uncertainty in the predictions from the numerical models is caused by the negligence of non-resolved land surface heterogeneity and the sub-surface dynamics and their potential impact on the state of the atmosphere. At the same time, mesoscale numerical models using finer horizontal grid resolution [O(1)km] can suffer from inconsistencies and neglected scale-dependencies in ABL parameterizations and non-resolved effects of integrated surface-subsurface lateral flow at this scale. Our present knowledge suggests large-eddy-simulation (LES) as an eventual solution to overcome the inadequacy of the physical parameterizations in the atmosphere in this transition scale, yet we are constrained by the computational resources, memory management, big-data, when using LES for regional domains. For the present, there is a need for scale-aware parameterizations not only in the atmosphere but also in the land surface and subsurface model components. In this study, we use the recently developed Terrestrial Systems Modeling Platform (TerrSysMP) as a numerical tool to analyze the uncertainty in the simulation of surface exchange fluxes and boundary layer circulations at grid resolutions of the order of 1km, and explore the sensitivity of the atmospheric boundary layer evolution and convective rainfall processes on land surface heterogeneity.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86711", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86712" } }
{"authors":"Susannah Burrows::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Xiaohong Liu::University of Wyoming--Scott Elliott::Los Alamos National Laboratory--Richard Easter::Battelle PNNL--Balwinder Singh::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--Philip Rasch::Pacific Northwest National Laboratory--", "title":"A43C-0298: How much does sea spray aerosol organic matter impact clouds and radiation? Sensitivity studies in the Community Atmosphere Model", "abstract":"Submicron marine aerosol particles are frequently observed to contain substantial fractions of organic material, hypothesized to enter the atmosphere as part of the primary sea spray aerosol formed through bubble bursting. This organic matter in sea spray aerosol may affect cloud condensation nuclei and ice nuclei concentrations in the atmosphere, particularly in remote marine regions. Members of our team have developed a new, mechanistic representation of the enrichment of sea spray aerosol with organic matter, the OCEANFILMS parameterization (Burrows et al., 2014). This new representation uses fields from an ocean biogeochemistry model to predict properties of the emitted aerosol. We have recently implemented the OCEANFILMS representation of sea spray aerosol composition into the Community Atmosphere Model (CAM), and performed sensitivity experiments and comparisons with alternate formulations. Early results from these sensitivity simulations will be shown, including impacts on aerosols, clouds, and radiation. References: Burrows, S. M., Ogunro, O., Frossard, A. A., Russell, L. M., Rasch, P. J., and Elliott, S. M.: A physically based framework for modeling the organic fractionation of sea spray aerosol from bubble film Langmuir equilibria, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 14, 13601-13629, doi:10.5194/acp-14-13601-2014, 2014.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86712", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86713" } }
{"authors":"Tingyu Hou::Purdue University Northwest A&F University--Timothy Filley::Purdue University--Madison Hughes::Purdue University--Yanan Tong::Northwest A&F University--Thanos Papanicolaou::University of Tennessee--Kenneth Wacha::University of Iowa--Benjamin Abban::University of Tennessee--John Boys::University of Tennessee--Christopher Wilson::University of Tennessee--", "title":"B33D-0749: Hill slope and erosional controls on soil organic geochemistry in intensely managed landscapes", "abstract":"Like many regions of North America, the last 100 years of agriculture in the glaciated upper Midwest has lead to a major redistribution of soil carbon and nitrogen on the landscape. Through the natural coevolution of geomorphic, pedogenic, and ecological processes in the critical zone or by punctual changes in these processes as a result of intensive management, landscapes established characteristic hierarchies of physicochemical controls on organic matter stability. In the Intensively-Managed Landscapes - Critical Zone Observatory (IML-CZO) in Iowa and Illinois these processes are being studied with a combination of surface soil geochemical surveys and simulated rainfall/erosion experiments to document how the organic geochemistry of hill slopes, under land management ranging from row crop to restored prairie, are currently evolving, and how they evolved during early management and pre settlement. Using a combination of soil analyses including elemental, stable isotope, textural, and soil biopolymers (lignin and cutin/suberin fatty acids (SFA)) we investigated the spatial patterns of static surface soil properties and time course rainfall-erosional experiments along the same slopes to gain insight into soil carbon and biopolymer enrichment patterns in east-central Iowa within the Clear Creek Watershed. Both lignin and substituted fatty acid concentration and their molecular ratios highlighted differences in C3/C4 (soy/corn) management activities in surface soils while over 40 years of prairie restoration dramatically altered surface soil profiles. For example, a general pattern in static baseline samples was an enrichment of 15N in soils down slope and an opposite pattern of accumulation/loss of lignin and SFA in topographic highs and lows. Transport of soil particles, associated biopolymers, and elemental and isotope signatures, exhibited distinct patterns based upon both position of the hill slope and directionality of flow with respect to rill/gully direction created by tillage activity. This indicates that particle/chemistry transport and enrichment of organic chemical signatures down slope and into associated flood plains and streams in modern intensively managed systems should be distinct from pre-settlement patterns and help interpret pre- and post settlement alluvium sediment.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86713", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86714" } }
{"authors":"Lin Zhang::Peking University--Jingyuan Shao::Peking University--Xiao Lu::Peking University--Yuanhong Zhao::Peking University--Sunling Gong::CAMS Chinese Academy of Meteorological Sciences--Daven Henze::University of Colorado at Boulder--", "title":"A53D-02: Sources and Processes Affecting Particulate Matter Pollution over North China", "abstract":"Severe fine particulate matter (PM2.5) pollution over North China has received broad attention worldwide in recent years. Better understanding the sources and processes controlling pollution over this region is of great importance with urgent implications for air quality policy. We will present a four-dimensional variational (4D-Var) data assimilation system using the GEOS-Chem chemical transport model and its adjoint model at 0.25° × 0.3125° horizontal resolution, and apply it to analyze the factors affecting PM2.5 concentrations over North China. Hourly surface observations of PM2.5 and sulfur dioxide (SO2) from the China National Environmental Monitoring Center (CNEMC) can be assimilated into the model to evaluate and constrain aerosol (primary and precursors) emissions. Application of the data assimilation system to the APEC period (the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit; 5-11 November 2014) shows that 46% of the PM2.5 pollution reduction during APEC (“The APEC Blue”) can be attributed to meteorology conditions and the rest 54% to emission reductions due to strict emission controls. Ammonia emissions are shown to significantly contribute to PM2.5 over North China in the fall. By converting sulfuric acid and nitric acid to longer-lived ammonium sulfate and ammonium nitrate aerosols, ammonia plays an important role in promoting their regional transport influences. We will also discuss the pathways and mechanisms of external long-range transport influences to the PM2.5 pollution over North China.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86714", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86715" } }
{"authors":"Jennifer Natali::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"EP43B-0982: Twenty Years of “Plug-and-Pond” Meadow Restoration: A Geomorphic Review", "abstract":"Channel incision has degraded the ecological function of wet meadows across montane regions of California. Conservation groups estimate that half of the Sierra Nevada’s 333,000 acres of meadow are entrenched in a degraded state that is characterized by a shift from groundwater­fed, herbaceous vegetation to more sparse, drought­tolerant woody vegetation. My poster will present results of field research on a prominent restoration technique in California's montane meadows, the ` Plug­and­Pond.`  Fundamentally, the technique re­channelizes the meadow by blocking flow into incised stream channels. Spoils dug from meadow sediments plug the incised channel, creating ponds as a by­product. One of three approaches to re­channelization ensues: (1) construct a new shallow and sinuous channel, (2) redirect flows into a remnant channel, (3) or allow the channel to define itself over the meadow floodplain. Re­ channelization aims to support overbank flows at 1.5 to 3 year recurrence intervals. Field surveys of ten of the oldest “plug-and-pond” meadow restoration projects in California reveal that channel bed degradation caused by meadow-scale changes to channel slope (i.e. culverts concentrating flows, channel straightening, meadow grazing) may be more conducive to intensive restoration approaches like Plug-and-Pond.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86715", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86716" } }
{"authors":"Hussain Abdulla::Texas A & M University Corpus Christi--Kenneth Mopper::Old Dominion University--", "title":"B23D-0634: The Removal of Terrestrial Dissolved Organic Matter in Coastal Regions by Photo-Flocculation Process", "abstract":"The fate of terrestrial dissolved organic matter (tDOM) as it moves to open ocean was the focus of many studies for the last three decades, most of these studies were focused on three major removal processes: 1) Photochemical mineralization of tDOM (conversion to inorganic forms); 2) Microbial oxidation; and 3) Mixing-induced flocculation. Based on recent estimations, the combination of theses removal processes accounts for ~20-35% of the loss of tDOM in estuaries and coastal regions; which is far from closing the gap between the riverine fluxes of tDOM and the amount of tDOM detected in the open ocean. In a preliminary experiment to determine if photo-flocculation indeed occurs at pH values and ionic strengths found in estuaries. A 0.1-μm filtered riverine was diluted 1:1 with artificial seawater and MilliQ water to yield final salinities ranging from 0 – 15; the pH of the saline samples was ranged from 6-8. Photo-flocculation was observed for all salinities, with particles organic carbon (POC) values ranged from 3.2 to 8.5% of the original DOC. Interestingly, the composition of the Photo-flocculated particles in the saline samples was markedly different from the zero salinity samples as shown in their FT-IR spectra. The photo-flocculated particles that formed in the saline samples appear to be rich in carbohydrate and amide functionalities (protein-like), while containing insignificant deprotonated carboxylate. While the flocs that formed in freshwater (salinity zero) are richer in deprotonated carboxyl groups, and relatively depleted in carbohydrate functionality.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86716", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86717" } }
{"authors":"Xi Peng::China University of Geosciences Wuhan--", "title":"The abstract title MUST be entered in initial upper case, for example: Mark th", "abstract":"The new seismic reflection dataset in south Java provide detailed structures of the southern Java forearc system. The plate interface is expressed as irregular surface in the western part and a continuous smooth surface in the eastern area. This observation coincides with the higher uplift of the western part of the forearc high. Cluster of shallow earthquakes can be observed near the western part of Java trench. Deformation of the forearc high is more intense in the west as compared to that in the east, consistent with higher uplift of the western part of the forearc high. However, the landward portion of compressional structures still can be observed within the whole forearc basin sediments. Backthrusting of the accretionary wedge can be observed, similar to that in the Mentawai forearc basin. The higher uplift of the forearc high has separated the Pliocene sediments deposited in the forearc basin and in the forearc high. Therefore, we suggest that this uplift is after the Pliocene. A morphological break of the top of the accretionary wedge can be recognized to the south of the forearc high, marking the boundary between the forearc high thrust with those in the frontal wedge. We suggest that the compressional structures developed in the southern Java forearc have similar features with those in the southern Sumatra forearc. However, some part of the forearc high has been abruptly deformed possibly due to the subduction of higher relief in the oceanic plate, similar to the Roo Rise. The new seismic reflection dataset in south Java provide detailed structures of the southern Java forearc system. The plate interface is expressed as irregular surface in the western part and a continuous smooth surface in the eastern area. This observation coincides with the higher uplift of the western part of the forearc high. Cluster of shallow earthquakes can be observed near the western part of Java trench. Deformation of the forearc high is more intense in the west as compared to that in the east, consistent with higher uplift of the western part of the forearc high. However, the landward portion of compressional structures still can be observed within the whole forearc basin sediments. Backthrusting of the accretionary wedge can be observed, similar to that in the Mentawai forearc basin. The higher uplift of the forearc high has separated the Pliocene sediments deposited in the forearc basin and in the forearc high. Therefore, we suggest that this uplift is after the Pliocene. A morphological break of the top of the accretionary wedge can be recognized to the south of the forearc high, marking the boundary between the forearc high thrust with those in the frontal wedge. We suggest that the compressional structures developed in the southern Java forearc have similar features with those in the southern Sumatra forearc. However, some part of the forearc high has been abruptly deformed possibly due to the subduction of higher relief in the oceanic plate, similar to the Roo Rise.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86717", "section":""} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86720" } }
{"authors":"Preston Jordan::Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory--", "title":"GC41E-1126: Pragmatic consideration of geologic carbon storage design based upon historic pressure response to oil and gas production in the southern San Joaquin basin", "abstract":"Annual CO2 emissions from large fixed sources in the southern San Joaquin Valley and vicinity in California are about 20 million metric tons per year (MMT/Y). Cumulative net fluid production due to oil and gas extracted from below the minimum depth for geologic carbon storage (taken as 1,500 m) was 1.4 billion m3 at reservoir conditions as of 2010. At an average CO2 storage density of 0.5 metric tons per m3, this implies 35 years of storage capacity at current emission rates just to refill the vacated volume, neglecting possible reservoir consolidation. However, the production occurred from over 300 pools. The production rate relative to average pressure decline in the more productive pools analyzed suggests they could receive about 2 MMT/Y raising the field average pressure to nearly the fracturing pressure. This would require well fields as extensive as those used for production, instead of the single to few wells per project typically envisioned. Even then, the actual allowable injection rate to the larger pools would be less than 2 MMT/Y in order to keep pressures at the injection well below the fracture pressure. This implies storing 20 MMT/Y would require developing storage operations in tens of pools with hundreds, if not over a thousand, wells. This utilization of one of the basins with the most storage capacity in the state would result in reducing the state’s fixed source emissions by only one eighth relative to current emissions. The number of fields and wells involved in achieving this suggests a different strategy might provide more capacity at similar cost. Specifically, staging wells that initially produce water in the vicinity of fewer injection wells could result in both more storage. This water could be directed to a shallower zone, or supplied to the surface at a similar cost. The commencement of ocean water desalination in the state indicates the economics of water supply might support treating this water for beneficial use, particularly if it has a lower salinity than sea water.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86720", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86721" } }
{"authors":"Diego Pedreros::U.S. Geological Survey EROS Center / FEWS NET--Chris Funk::UC Santa Barbara U.S. Geological Survey EROS Center / FEWS NET--Molly Brown::University of Maryland College Park--Driba Korecha::National Meteorology Agency Ethiopia--Yakob Seid::FEWS NET--", "title":"GC41B-1100: Exploring Agro-Climatic Trends in Ethiopia Using CHIRPS", "abstract":"The Famine Early Warning Systems Network (FEWS NET) uses the Climate Hazards Group Infrared Precipitation with Stations (CHIRPS) to monitor agricultural food production in different regions of the world. CHIRPS is a 1981-present, 5 day, approximately 5km resolution, rainfall product based on a combination of geostationary satellite observations, a high resolution climatology and in situ station observations. Furthermore, FEWS NET has developed a gridded implementation of the Water Requirement Satisfaction Index (WRSI), a water balance measurement indicator of crop performance. This study takes advantage of the CHIRPS’ long term period of record and high spatial and temporal resolution to examine agro-climatic trends in Ethiopia. We use the CHIRPS rainfall dataset to calculate the WRSI for the boreal spring and summer crop seasons, as well as for spring-summer rangelands conditions. We find substantial long term rainfall declines in the spring and summer seasons across southeastern and northeastern Ethiopia. Crop Model results indicate that rainfall declines in the cropped regions have been associated with water deficits during the critical grain filling periods in well populated and/or highly vulnerable parts of eastern Ethiopia. WRSI results in the pastoral areas indicate substantial reductions in rangeland health during the later part of the growing seasons. These health declines correspond to the regions of Somaliland and Afar that have experienced chronic severe food insecurity since 2010. Key words: CHIRPS, satellite estimated rainfall, agricultural production", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86721", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86722" } }
{"authors":"Campbell Watson::IBM Research--James Cipriani::IBM Research--Anthony Praino::IBM Research--Lloyd Treinish::IBM Research--Mukul Tewari::IBM Research--Harry Kolar::IBM Research--", "title":"A21D-0157: The Jefferson Project: Large-eddy simulations of a watershed", "abstract":"The Jefferson Project is a new endeavor at Lake George, NY by IBM Research, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI) and The Fund for Lake George. Lake George is an oligotrophic lake - one of low nutrients - and a 30-year study recently published by RPI’s Darrin Fresh Water Institute highlighted the renowned water quality is declining from the injection of salt (from runoff), algae, and invasive species. In response, the Jefferson Project is developing a system to provide extensive data on relevant physical, chemical and biological parameters that drive ecosystem function. The system will be capable of real-time observations and interactive modeling of the atmosphere, watershed hydrology, lake circulation and food web dynamics. In this presentation, we describe the development of the operational forecast system used to simulate the atmosphere in the model stack, Deep ThunderTM (a configuration of the ARW-WRF model). The model performs 48-hr forecasts twice daily in a nested configuration, and in this study we present results from ongoing tests where the innermost domains are dx = 333-m and 111-m. We discuss the model’s ability to simulate boundary layer processes, lake surface conditions (an input into the lake model), and precipitation (an input into the hydrology model) during different weather regimes, and the challenges of data assimilation and validation at this scale. We also explore the potential for additional nests over select regions of the watershed to better capture turbulent boundary layer motions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86722", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86723" } }
{"authors":"Ann Morey::Oregon State University--Andrew Meigs::Oregon State Univ--Daniel Gavin::University of Oregon--", "title":"NH33C-1938: Estimates of minimum shaking intensity required to induce liquefaction and sediment redistribution in southern Cascadia forearc lakes", "abstract":"Sedimentary sequences from several southern Cascadia forearc lakes near the California/Oregon border contain anomalous deposits suspected to have formed as the result of strong ground motions in great earthquakes. We compared the sedimentary sequences from two pairs of lakes that lie ~30 km above the subduction interface, to determine the impact of shaking on deposit characteristics. We find that disturbance event deposit characteristics depend on the geomorphologic and geologic setting of each lake, and thick minerogenic layers occur in lakes with deltas or slides through which source water flows. Proximal lake pair (~140 km from the trench): These lakes are cirque lakes ~20 km from one another. One lake has visible silty clay layers, and the other only has slight changes in density and mineral content not visually apparent. Deposits may be preceded by, or coincident with, a layer of coarse plant macrofossils. Distal lake pair (~185 km from the trench): These lakes were created by the same landslide and contain thick disturbance event deposits with a high percentage of minerogenic sediment. The smaller lake contains a record of pseudo-annual flood deposits that have been interpreted as a time series of erosion magnitudes (see poster by Gavin et al. also in this session). The thickest of these events fall above a strongly linear relationship, suggesting a separate process (such as earthquakes). The thick deposits grade from organic-rich to mineral-rich, and are capped by a thin layer of fine-grained silty clay. A sequence of progressively thinner deposits follows each thick layer, and may reflect post-earthquake erosional events. The larger of the two landslide-dammed lakes contains thick minerogenic deposits with normal grading, and appear to be coeval with the thickest layers in the smaller lake. The upper portion of this record is well-dated, and likely contains a deposit resulting from the 1700AD earthquake. We hypothesize that strong ground motions cause liquefaction of the coarse, unconsilidated sediments of the deltas or slides, causing a release of fine sediment into the lake forming the thick minerogenic layers interpreted to be seismogenic deposits. We test the hypothesis using delta composition and structure data combined with current ground motion equations for different Cascadia earthquake magnitudes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86723", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86724" } }
{"authors":"Urooj Khan::Bureau of Meteorology--Hoori Ajami::University of New South Wales--Narendra Tuteja::Bureau of Meteorology--Ashish Sharma::University of New South Wales--", "title":"H51B-1361: Sensitivity of Soil Moisture and Runoff Dynamics to Hydrologic Response Unit Delineations in SMART", "abstract":"A new approach of semi-distributed hydrologic modelling has been developed to reduce the computational time and effort in distributed hydrologic modelling at large catchment scales. The GIS-based semi-distributed hydrological modelling framework, SMART, delineates contiguous and topologically connected Hydrologic Response Units (HRUs) and simulates soil moisture and runoff dynamics using a 2-dimensional model based on Richards’ equation at the scale of cross sections or equivalent cross sections (ECS). Simulated fluxes from every cross section or ECS are weighted by the respective area from which the cross sections or ECSs were formulated in a first-order sub-basin. These are then aggregated to obtain catchment scale fluxes. Herewith, we investigate the impact of HRU delineation methodology in simulating hydrologic fluxes at the catchment scale using SMART. The HRU delineation methodology consists of delineating first order sub-basins and landforms. Landforms which transfer fluxes from the upper part of a hillslope to the lower regions are delineated using topographic and geomorphologic descriptors of the catchment. However, obtaining the appropriate thresholds for landform delineation is impacted by the metric and landform delineation approach chosen by the modeller. We use variation in a number of topographic and geomorphologic descriptors of the entire catchment or groups of sub-catchments in relation to distance from the stream to assess the impact of landform delineation approach on simulated hydrologic fluxes. In addition to the spatial resolution of a digital elevation model, , three landform delineation approaches of SMART are examined. In the next step, we extend this approach to catchments with different topographic and geomorphic characteristics to find appropriate metrics for landform delineation in different settings.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86724", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86725" } }
{"authors":"John Moreau::University of Melbourne--Emily Hepburn::University of Melbourne--", "title":"B21C-0470: The Role of Thaumarchaeota in N2O generation in an unconfined basalt-sandstone aquifer system, Western Victoria (Australia)", "abstract":"The mechanisms by which nitrous oxide is produced and transformed in groundwater are poorly understood. Here we used GC-MS and nitrogen and oxygen isotope analyses to quantify nitrate, ammonia and nitrous oxide levels in nitrate-contaminated aquifers in the Newer Volcanics province of Western Victoria. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR), and phylogenetic analyses of functional nitrogen-cycling and 16S rRNA genes, of whole community microbial DNA from groundwater samples obtained from different depths within different aquifers with low-flow pumping revealed nitrate, ammonia and nitrous oxide levels of up to ~40 mg/L, up to ~0.85 mg/L, and up to ~770 nM, respectively in several groundwater samples. Delta 15N and delta 18O values ranged from -2.68‰ to 68.19‰ and -3.37‰ to 26.83‰, respectively. Nitrate and nitrous oxide concentrations decreased with depth in the unconfined aquifer, while TOC generally increased. Higher ammonia levels were observed in more heavily ferruginized sandstones. Increaased nitrate and nitrous oxide levels were found within the principal basaltic aquifers. Q-PCR results showed variable concentrations of nir, nar, nos and amo genes associated with different redox transformations along the nitrification and denitrification pathways, indicating potential nitrous oxide formation via both pathways within different depths in the aquifer. 16S rRNA gene analyses implicated an important role for the Thaumarchaeota in groundwater nitrogen cycling.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86725", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86726" } }
{"authors":"Lisa Ito::University of Tokyo--Yoshio Takahashi::University of Tokyo--Minoru Yoneda::University of Tokyo--Takayuki Omori::University of Tokyo--Kohei Yamazaki::University of Tokyo--Hideto Yoshida::University of Tokyo--Yusuke Tamenori::JASRI--Hiroki Suga::Hiroshima University--Toru Yamaguchi::Keio University--", "title":"NH33A-1891: Relationship between elemental distribution in soil and human impact in Majuro Atoll", "abstract":"Majuro Atoll is one of islands of the Marshall Islands, located in the central Pacific Ocean. Reef-building corals and biological remains such as foraminifera have formed the islands under the influence of sea-level changes in the Holocene. Since the altitude of the general coral reef island tends to be very low, it is believed that the islands are vulnerable to natural disasters and climate change. However, people have lived in the Majuro Atoll in Marshall Islands for more than 2000 years. Reef islands in the same atoll are often considered to have same tendencies in the developing process; however, (i) there are possibilities that each geography produces different condition in habitat and (ii) human activities have changed the original nature in the island. In this study, we focus on the changes of physico-chemical conditions of soil depending on the depth according to time series variation in three islands in Majuro Atoll. Dating of each depth was conducted by radiocarbon (14C) measurement for foraminifera using accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) and Bayesian age-depth Models. X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and ICP-MS analyses were employed to measure major and trace elements at different depth, respectively. Among them, phosphorus (P) is considered to play an important role in soil development; therefore X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) analysis was also conducted to examine the chemical form of P. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to examine the elemental distribution in the soil particles, while X-ray computed tomography (CT) was used to calculate the rate of porosity of foraminifera at each depth. Concentrations of Fe, Mn, and P decrease with depth and vice versa for Mg. As a result of the μ-XAFS analysis, P in the soil exists as organic phosphorus and apatite. Phosphorous detected from the upper layer was found to distribute heterogeneously in the particles, which was observed as punctate pattern by the SEM observation. The ICP-MS results showed that Zn concentration was high in the upper layers which are likely affected by human activities. In this presentation, we discuss (i) the relationship between the pedological development and human impact and (ii) the elements that can be used as an indicator of human activities.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86726", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86728" } }
{"authors":"Eben Hodgin::Harvard University--", "title":"PP31B-2239: Carbon Isotopic tests on the Origins of the Shuram Anomaly from the San Juan Fm., Peru", "abstract":"Carbon isotope anomalies are associated with perturbations to the carbon cycle that offer insight into the geochemical evolution of the Earth. The largest Carbon isotope anomaly in earth history is the Shuram, which remains poorly understood in spite of being linked to the oxygenation of earth, the rise of metazoans, and a complete reorganization of the carbon cycle. From a basin transect of the carbonate-dominated San Juan Formation in southern Peru, we present evidence for the first clear example of the Shuram isotope anomaly in South America. Unique to this succession are ~140 meters of organic-rich black shale within the anomaly, containing as much as 4% TOC. Preliminary data from the organic-rich black shales of the San Juan Fm. confirm that δ13Corg is relatively invariant and does not covary with δ13Ccarb. These observations are consistent with other Shuram sections and support various models: an exogenous carbon source, an enlarged dissolved organic carbon pool, as well as authigenic carbonate production in organic-rich anoxic sediments. Critical tests of these models have been complicated by a paucity of organics in Shuram facies worldwide. Further analyses of the robust organics from the Shuram facies of the San Juan Fm. therefore hold promise in shedding light on the origin of the Shuram isotope anomaly and critical earth history events to which it has been linked.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86728", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86729" } }
{"authors":"Allegra Giblin::University of Houston--", "title":"EP13A-0938: Paleocene Turbidite Deposition in the Central American Seaway (NW Costa Rica): Geochemical Analysis and Provenance of Detrital Spinel and Clinopyroxene", "abstract":"The Central American Land Bridge is the crucial connection between North and South America, and the Miocene closure of the Panama seaway led to a change in global oceanic circulation patterns. Modern Costa Rica is part of the island arc that formed over the western Caribbean subduction zone, and the Santa Elena peninsula is on the northwest coast of Costa Rica next to the Sandino forearc basin. This study focuses on the origin and provenance of the Paleocene deep-water Rivas and Descartes turbidites that crop out on the northern part of the Santa Elena peninsula in northwestern Costa Rica. Understanding the sedimentary fill of the Sandino Basin that contributed to the closing of the seaway may lead to a better understanding of the Late Cretaceous-Paleogene arcs. Provenance studies of the Santa Elena Peninsula turbidite sandstone bodies constrain the history of the paleogeography and tectonics of the region. Petrographic analyses of rock thin sections constrain source areas; geochemical analysis of individual detrital heavy minerals from rock samples give indications of sediment sources and tectonic setting during deposition. This study is a provenance analysis based on (i) semi-quantitative energy-dispersive spectrometry analysis of heavy minerals, (ii) quantitative wavelength-dispersive spectrometry for major elements of detrital clinopyroxene and spinel grains, (iii) trace element analysis through laser ablation of single detrital clinopyroxene grains, and (iv) comparative analysis of the different potential source rocks to clearly identify the most likely sediment sources. The detrital spinel and clinopyroxene are possibly sourced from: mantle ophiolites, mid-ocean ridge gabbros, or volcanic arc tholeiitic basalts or calc-alkaline andesites. Spinel and clinopyroxne geochemistry suggests a possible peridotitic source, linked to mantle rocks that are now covered by Tertiary volcanics or have completely eroded. The character of the crustal minerals indicates sources from mid-ocean ridge gabbros, and island arc tholeiites and andesites. This suggests that during the early history of the gateway uplift and seaway closure, sediment sources were dominated first by older ophiolites and gabbroic sources, then by volcanic inputs from the arc.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86729", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86730" } }
{"authors":"Kim Mattson::Ecosystems Northwest--Jianwei Zhang::US Forest Service--", "title":"B43I-0678: Field and Lab Methods to Reduce Sampling Variation in Soil Carbon", "abstract":"Natural variability in soil and detrital carbon sampling is typically large enough that it hinders accurate assessment of standing stock and changes that may occur following disturbances and experimental treatments. We are developing carbon budgets in forests of Northern California and wish to see how experimental canopy thinning may affect carbon cycling in these forests. In the pre-treatment phase, we have sought methods to quantify detrital carbon pools in an accurate and efficient manner. We have found that small soil excavations 15 cm diameter to a depth of 10 cm work very well to reduce variation an avoid introducing sampling biases. We excavate a pit carefully of uniform dimensions using cutting chisels and scoops. We fill the void created using small pebbles contained in a small net and then weigh the pebbles to obtain a volume estimate of the soil collected. The samples are sorted moist through a series of sieves of 6, 4, and 2 mm into rocks, live roots, dead roots, woody debris, and remaining soil and its organic matter. From a single sample, we estimate proportional rock volume, fine soil bulk density (soil bulk density of the 2 mm fraction), live roots, dead roots, woody debris, and proportion of organic matter in the 2 mm fraction. The standard deviations of soil measures (soil carbon, loss on ignition, bulk density, rock volume, live and dead root mass) were universally reduced over similar measures by soil corers, in some instances by up to 5-fold. Coefficient of variation using excavation pits are typically 5 to 10 %, whereas cores were 20 to 30 %. We have observed that variation in soil organic matter is more a function of variation in soil bulk density than with variation in percent soil organic matter content. As a result, we often see increased soil organic matter stores at depths below 10 cm. Soils beneath highly decayed logs show increases in soil carbon in the mineral soil suggesting woody debris is a source of soil carbon. Below-ground carbon contents to a depth of 30 cm range from 90 to 150 Mg ha -1. It is composed of approximately 3 % liver roots, 3 % dead roots, 9 % woody debris, and the remainder soil organic matter.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86730", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86731" } }
{"authors":"", "title":"B21D-0498: Pressure effect on dissimilatory sulfate reduction", "abstract":"Biosouring is the production of H2S by sulfate reducing microorganisms (SRM) in-situ or in the produced fluids of oil reservoirs. Sulfide is explosive, toxic and corrosive which can trigger equipment and transportation failure, leading to environmental catastrophe. As oil exploration and reservoir development continue, subsequent enhanced recovery is occurring in progressively deeper formations and typical oil reservoir pressures range from 10-50 MPa. Therefore, an understanding of souring control effects will require an accurate understanding of the influence of pressure on SRM metabolism and the efficacy of souring control treatments at high pressure. Considerable work to date has focussed on souring control at ambient pressure; however, the influence of pressure on biogeochemical processes and souring treatments in oil reservoirs is poorly understood. To explore the impact of pressure on SRM, wild type Desulfovibrio alaskensis G20 (isolated from a producing oil well in Ventura County, California) was grown under a range of pressures (0.1-14 MPa) at 30 °C. Complete sulfate reduction occurred in all pressures tested within 3 days, but microbial growth was inhibited with increasing pressure. Bar-seq identified several genes associated with flagella biosynthesis (including FlhB) and assembly as important for survival at elevated pressure and fitness was confirmed using individual transposon mutants. Flagellar genes have previously been implicated with biofilm formation and confocal microscopy on glass slides incubated with wild type D. alaskensis G20 showed more biomass associated with surfaces under pressure, highlighting the link between pressure, flagellar and biofilm formation. To determine the effect of pressure on the efficacy of SRM inhibitors, IC50 experiments were conducted and D. alaskensis G20 showed a greater resistance to nitrate and the antibiotic chloramphenicol, but a lower resistance to perchlorate. These results will be discussed in the context of deep subsurface microbiology and oil reservoir biosouring. Overall, this work furthers our understanding of oil reservoir biogeochemistry and highlights the impact of pressure on biofilm formation and biosouring strategies.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86731", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86732" } }
{"authors":"Xingang Fan::Western Kentucky University--", "title":"A33J-0316: Model Simulation of Soil Temperature Impacts on Regional Climate", "abstract":"Soil temperature has been found to be a predictor for regional seasonal precipitation. Modeling studies have indicated the synoptic impact on heavy rain events. However, at short-term climate time scales (e.g., seasonal), the mechanisms of how soil temperature would impact seasonal precipitation are not known. By using the Weather Research and Forecasting model that coupled with the Noah land surface model, a series of idealized modeling experiments are conducted to investigate at what extent and what temporal and spatial scales, soil temperature can impact seasonal precipitation. The modeling results analyses are focused on the spatial and temporal characteristics of regional seasonal precipitation changes due to the different patterns of soil temperature change and its strength of warming/cooling effect.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86732", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86733" } }
{"authors":"Gabriel Antunes Daldegan::University of California Santa Barbara--Dar Roberts::University of California--Seth Peterson::University of California Santa Barbara--Fernanda Ribeiro::University of California Santa Barbara--", "title":"EP53A-0982: Mapping fire events in the transition of Amazon and Cerrado biome using remote sensing", "abstract":"Abstract to AGU Fire is considered one of the determinant factors that have shaped Cerrado biome, the Brazilian Savanna, considered the most biodiverse savanna in the world. At the same time, fire has not acted a major role during the evolution of the Amazon Forest due to the strong capacity it has to resist burning. Recently, with the expansion of the agricultural activities in the central Brazil, about 49% of the Cerrado has been converted to other uses and as deforestation vector runs towards the Amazon Forest it modifies the natural moist microclimate in the edges of the forest, increasing the likelihood of wildfires. Every year these ecosystems suffer with several fire events responsible for large burned areas, causing losses of biomass, biodiversity, soil nutrients, and releasing tons of CO2 that help climate change. The occurrence of fires has a direct relationship with the climate of the central portion of the south american continent, charaterized by a two seasons regime, wet and dry, each one lasting around 6 months. In this region is located the ecotone of these two majors Brazilians ecosystems. In the Cerrado biome fire is often used to manage pasture, stimulating the regrowth of natural grasses used as pasture and also to open new areas for agriculture. There are researches showing that people have been traditionally using fire as a lower cost way to manage their lands for different purposes. In the Amazon forest the cycle of deforestation started around the 60’s with incentives from the federal government to populate the region in the middle of the last century, and most recently by the progress of the commodities prices, such as soybean and sugar-cane, that has occupied vast areas of the Cerrado and is marching towards the forest. In the Amazon, fire is frequently used to further open the areas that were previously logged selectively and then converted to agricultural uses. Given the ecological importance of the Amazon Forest and Cerrado biome and the threat fire is posting to them, this research aims to perform a multiscale study of fire events in the transition zone between the two biomes, using MODIS to identify fire scars in a coarser resolution and then refining the scale using Landsat images, aiming to confirm the fire scar identification and compare the differences between the measurements performed using the two methods.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86733", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86734" } }
{"authors":"Scott Baker::UNAVCO, Inc. Boulder--Christopher Crosby::UNAVCO, Inc. Boulder--Charles Meertens::UNAVCO, Inc. Boulder--", "title":"G21B-1041: A Community-Contributed InSAR Product Archive at UNAVCO", "abstract":"The NASA-supported seamless synthetic aperture radar archive (SSARA) project at UNAVCO has implemented a distributed access system for SAR data and derived data products (i.e. interferograms) through the use of simple web services. Under the SSARA project, a user-contributed InSAR archive for interferograms, time series, and other derived data products was developed at UNAVCO. The InSAR archive is based on the hierarchical data format release 5 (HDF5) data format and provides storage, distribution, and sharing of research results within the geodesy community. HDF5 is the preferred format for InSAR data products because it provides a more robust set of features for storing InSAR data. HDF5 has been adopted by the Alaska Satellite Facility (ASF) and is also used in InSAR time series analysis software packages such as GIAnT from Caltech. Digital object identifiers (DOI) have been incorporated into the archive allowing users to assign a permanent location for their processed result and easily references the final data products. Further development has led to the adoption of the HDF-EOS5 specification that provides standards for data and metadata storage within HDF5. This provides easier integration with GIS software packages such as ArcGIS and GDAL and conversion to other data formats like NetCDF and GeoTIFF.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86734", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86735" } }
{"authors":"Benjamin Crosby::Idaho State University--Theodore Barnhart::University of Colorado at Boulder--Joel Rowland::Los Alamos National Laboratory--", "title":"EP54B-05: The high resolution topographic evolution of an active retrogressive thaw slump compiled from a decade of photography, ground surveys, laser scans and satellite imagery", "abstract":"Remote sensing imagery has enables the temporal reconstruction of thermal erosion features including lakes, shorelines and hillslope failures in remote Arctic locations, yet these planar data limit analysis to lines and areas. This study explores the application of varying techniques to reconstruct the three dimensional evolution of a single thermal erosion feature using a mixture of opportunistic oblique photos, ground surveys and satellite imagery. At the Selawik River retrogressive thaw slump in northwest Alaska, a bush plane collected oblique aerial photos when the feature was first discovered in 2004 and in subsequent years. These images were recently processed via Structure from Motion to generate georeferenced point clouds for the years prior to the initiation of our research. High resolution ground surveys in 2007, 2009 and 2010 were completed using robotic total station. Terrestrial laser scans (TLS) were collected in the summers of 2011 and 2012. Analysis of stereo satellite imagery from 2012 and 2015 enable continued monitoring of the feature after ground campaigns ended. As accurate coregistraion between point clouds is vital to topographic change detection, all prior and subsequent datasets were georeferenced to stable features observed in the 2012 TLS scan. Though this coregistration introduces uncertainty into each image, the magnitudes of uncertainty are significantly smaller than the topographic changes detected. Upslope retreat of the slump headwall generally decreases over time as the slump floor progresses from a highly dissected gully topography to a low relief, earthflow dominated depositional plane. The decreasing slope of the slump floor diminishes transport capacity, resulting in the progressive burial of the slump headwall, thus decreasing headwall retreat rates. This self-regulation of slump size based on feature relief and transport capacity suggests a capacity to predict the maximum size a given feature can expand to before stabilization.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86735", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86736" } }
{"authors":"Fernando Garcia Menendez::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--Erwan Monier::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--Noelle Selin::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--", "title":"A42F-05: An Assessment of Uncertainty in Projections of Climate-Induced Changes to U.S. O3 Pollution", "abstract":"We have generated an ensemble simulation of 21st century climate change with over 3,000 years of modeled air quality to explore major sources of uncertainty in projections of climate-induced change to surface O3 over the US. Using the Community Atmosphere Model with Chemistry (CAM-Chem) coupled to the MIT Integrated Global System Model (IGSM-CAM), we are able to evaluate and compare how the three main drivers of uncertainty in climate simulations, emissions scenario, model response and natural variability, propagate to estimates of O3 concentrations. Our simulations of atmospheric chemistry in 2050 and 2100 under three different socioeconomic scenarios, suggest that the climate penalty on US O3 pollution may be substantial (> 5 ppb) under a business-as-usual case. These projections also reveal that greenhouse gas mitigation policies can significantly lessen these impacts. However, large uncertainties in climate models beyond emissions scenario strongly propagate to simulated O3 concentrations. Our results from hundreds of years of simulated air quality under multiple model initializations show that truly isolating the impact of anthropogenic-forced climate change requires multidecadal simulations (>15 years) and natural variability can largely mask climate-induced changes to surface O3 projected prior to 2050, under greenhouse gas mitigation, or for specific regions of the US. Similarly the effect of climate model response, largely ignored in air quality impact assessments, is evaluated by applying different values of climate sensitivity (2.0 - 4.5˚C) within the ensemble. Here again, projected impacts of climate change on O3 are shown to be largely dependent on the magnitude of model response beyond greenhouse gas emissions scenario. Finally, we discuss how uncertainty in air quality projections may further propagate to estimates of health and economic impacts, as well as the implications for cost-benefit climate policy analyses.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86736", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86737" } }
{"authors":"Yao PEI::Center for Earth System Science, Tsinghua University--HuaiYu Tian::Beijing Normal University--Bing Xu::Center for Earth System Science, Tsinghua University--", "title":"NH51A-1857: Modeling of the influence of humidity on H1N1 flu in China", "abstract":"In 2009, a heavy Flu hit the whole world. It was caused by the virus H1N1. The influenza first broke out in Mexico in March and the United States in April, 2009. The World Health Organization (WHO) announced that the H1N1 influenza became pandemic, alert to a warning phase of six. By the end of 2011, 181302 H1N1 cases were reported in mainland China. To improve our understanding on the impact of environmental factors on the disease transmission, we constructed an SIR (Susceptible – Infectious – Recovered) model incorporating environmental factors. It was found that the absolute humidity was a dominant environmental factor. The study interpolated the humidity data monitored with 340 weather stations from 1951 to 2011 in mainland China. First, the break point of the trend for the absolutely humidity was detected by the BFAST (Break For Additive Season and Trend) method. Then, the SIR model with and without the absolutely humidity incorporated in the model was built and tested. Finally, the results with the two scenarios were compared. Results indicate that lower absolutely humidity may promote the transmission of the H1N1 cases. The calculated basic reproductive number ranges from 1.65 to 3.66 with a changing absolute humidity. This is consistent with the former study result with basic reproductive number ranging from 2.03 to 4.18. The average recovery duration was estimated to be 5.7 days. The average duration to get immunity from the influenza is 399.02 days. A risk map is also produced to illustrate the model results.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86737", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86738" } }
{"authors":"ChuanBing Wang::USTC University of Science and Technology of China--Zijin Tong::USTC University of Science and Technology of China--Jin Liu::USTC University of Science and Technology of China--", "title":"SH53B-2505: A mechanism for the Fine Structures of Solar Radio Bursts Based on the Electron Cyclotron Maser Emission", "abstract":"A scenario based on the electron cyclotron maser emission is proposed for the fine structures of solar radio emission in the present discussion. It is suggested that under certain conditions modulation of the ratio between the plasma frequency and electron gyro-frequency by ultra low frequency waves, which is a key parameter for excitation of the maser instability, may lead to the intermittent emission of radio waves. As an example, the explanation of the observed fine-structure components in the solar type IIIb burst is discussed in detail. Three primary issues of the type IIIb bursts are addressed: 1) what is the physical mechanism that results in the intermittent emission elements that form a chain in the dynamic spectrum of type IIIb bursts, 2) what causes the split pair (or double stria) and the triple stria, 3) why in the events of fundamental-harmonic pair emission there is only IIIb-III, but IIIb-IIIb or III-IIIb cases are very rarely observed. The application of the scenario to some other type of solar radio bursts and their fine structures are also discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86738", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86739" } }
{"authors":"Alex Guenther::University of California, Irvine--", "title":"A31G-05: Biogenic organic emissions, air quality and climate", "abstract":"Living organisms produce copious amounts of a diverse array of metabolites including many volatile organic compounds that are released into the atmosphere. These compounds participate in numerous chemical reactions that influence the atmospheric abundance of important air pollutants and short-lived climate forcers including organic aerosol, ozone and methane. The production and release of these organics are strongly influenced by environmental conditions including air pollution, temperature, solar radiation, and water availability and they are highly sensitive to stress and extreme events. As a result, releases of biogenic organics to the atmosphere have an impact on, and are sensitive to, air quality and climate leading to potential feedback couplings. Their role in linking air quality and climate is conceptually clear but an accurate quantitative representation is needed for predictive models. Progress towards this goal will be presented including numerical model development and assessments of the predictive capability of the Model of Emission of Gases and Aerosols from Nature (MEGAN). Recent studies of processes controlling the magnitude and variations in biogenic organic emissions will be described and observations of their impact on atmospheric composition will be shown. Recent advances and priorities for future research will be discussed including laboratory process studies, long-term measurements, multi-scale regional studies, global satellite observations, and the development of a next generation model for simulating land-atmosphere chemical exchange.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86739", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86740" } }
{"authors":"Sarvesh Garimella::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--Jens Voigtländer::Leibniz Institute for Tropospheric Research--Gourihar Kulkarni::PNNL-Atmos Sci & Global Change--Frank Stratmann::Leibniz Institute for Tropospheric Research--Daniel Cziczo::MIT--EAPS--", "title":"A13B-0327: Biases in field measurements of ice nuclei concentrations", "abstract":"Ice nuclei (IN) play an important role in the climate system by influencing cloud properties, precipitation, and radiative transfer. Despite their importance, there are significant uncertainties in estimating IN concentrations because of the complexities of atmospheric ice nucleation processes. Field measurements of IN concentrations with Continuous Flow Diffusion Chamber (CFDC) IN counters have been vital to constrain IN number concentrations and have led to various parameterizations of IN number vs. temperature and particle concentration. These parameterizations are used in many global climate models, which are very sensitive to the treatment of cloud microphysics. However, due to non-idealities in CFDC behavior, especially at high relative humidity, many of these measurements are likely biased too low. In this study, the extent of this low bias is examined with laboratory experiments at a variety of instrument conditions using the SPectrometer for Ice Nucleation, a commercially-available CFDC-style chamber. These laboratory results are compared to theoretical calculations and computational fluid dynamics models to map the variability of this bias as a function of chamber temperature and relative humidity.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86740", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86742" } }
{"authors":"Konstantinos Andreadis::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Dimitrios Stampoulis::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Narendra Das::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Stephanie Granger::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Amor Ines::Michigan State University--Eunjin Han::International Research Institute for Climate and Society, Columbia University--", "title":"H43A-1467: Assimilating multi-sensor satellite observations for initializing hydrologic and agricultural forecasts", "abstract":"The application of data assimilation techniques in hydrologic studies has been gaining traction in the last 10-15 years. Most of these studies have focused on a single water cycle component, while few studies have examined methods of assimilating multiple observations from different sensors and of different hydrologic variables. The latter is challenging since any potential disparities in the observations could lead to suboptimal estimates after assimilation. The optimal estimates of hydrologic states, such as soil moisture, can be used as initial conditions for hydrologic forecasting systems. A multi-sensor and multivariate data assimilation forecast system has been developed at JPL (RHEAS, Regional Hydrologic Extremes Assessment System) with an initial focus on forecasting drought characteristics. The core of RHEAS is the VIC hydrology model, which has been widely used for many water resources applications. Apart from hydrologic forecasts, RHEAS can produce agricultural forecasts by coupling VIC with the DSSAT crop growth model. The modeling system is supported by a spatial database component, which provides access to multiple in-situ and satellite observations and allows data to be delivered to users through web-GIS or mobile application interfaces. The satellite observations, which include soil moisture, water storage, evapotranspiration, and snow cover, are assimilated into the VIC model to update the initial state of seasonal hydrologic and crop growth forecasts. We demonstrate the value of ingesting satellite observations by performing a series of hindcast experiments over both the United States (California and Upper Colorado basins) and Kenya (Nzoia basin). In-situ measurements along with a simulation with the best available datasets are used as the benchmark to evaluate the hindcasts against. The impact of each observation type or sensor is quantified, allowing for evaluating their relative contribution to improving the forecast skill. Particular case studies that are discussed in more detail include the ongoing California as well as the 2011 East Africa droughts.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86742", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86743" } }
{"authors":"Carmen Winn::University of New Mexico Main Campus--Karl Karlstrom::University of New Mexico Main Campus--Shari Kelley::New Mexico Bureau of Geology and Mineral Resources--David Shuster::University of California Berkeley--Matthew Fox::University of California Berkeley--", "title":"EP53A-0993: Age of Carving the Westernmost Grand Canyon: Conflicts and Potential Resolutions that Reconcile Geologic and Thermochronologic Data", "abstract":"Conflicting models for the timing of carving Grand Canyon, especially the westernmost Grand Canyon, involve either a 70 Ma segment of Grand Canyon or a segment that is < 5-6 Ma. Geologic data such as the late Miocene-Pliocene Muddy Creek constraint, the north-derived Paleogene Hindu fanglomerate, and the 19 Ma Separation Point basalt on the south rim favor the young model. However, thermochronologic data do not resolve the controversy. (U-Th)/He (AHe) data combined with 4He/3He modeling of a sample near Separation Canyon suggest river-level rocks cooled from ~100 to 30ºC at 70 Ma. Alternatively, apatite fission track (AFT) combined with AHe data show variable cooling paths in different locations, with some samples cooling steadily since 70 Ma and others remaining at ~40-80ºC until 5-6 Ma. Either model could be compatible with geologic data that show Laramide (90-70 Ma) cooling resulted from northward stripping of the Hualapai Plateau. Variable cooling sample-to-sample is also geologically plausible. This study area offers an important test-bed for interpreting the sensitivity of thermochronologic data in areas of slow cooling at relatively shallow (~ 1 km) burial depths. Recent 4He/3He modeling of Separation Canyon samples suggests a period of 90-70 Ma Laramide cooling, 70-10 Ma post-Laramide residence at ~40-60 ºC, and cooling to surface temperatures at 5-6 Ma. New HeFTy modeling of all available data was done considering the Precambrian age and cooling histories of the apatite, surface residence in the Cambrian and Devonian, and burial to 40-140 ºC during the Laramide. Our models indicate that most grains underwent substantial pre-Laramide radiation damage, and that peak Laramide burial and associated temperatures may not have been high enough to completely reset the AHe age and anneal lattice damage. Our overall conclusion is that published thermochronologic constraints are not yet able to fully resolve the “old” versus “young” canyon models because most AHe ages are old (> 50 Ma), the Precambrian apatite crystals have variable, often high eU values and complex radiation damage due to insufficient annealing as a result of thin cover following the Laramide. Additional AFT, AHe, and 4He/3He modeling on the same samples is underway and will likely define better cooling paths for this complex region.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86743", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86744" } }
{"authors":"Andrew Malone::University of Chicago--Douglas MacAyeal::University of Chicago--", "title":"C33E-0868: Determining the Current and Future Health of Low-Latitude Andean Glaciers Using an Equilibrium Line Altitude Model and Hypsometric Data from the Randolph Glacier Inventory", "abstract":"Mountain glaciers have been described as the water towers of world, and for many populations in the low-latitude South American Andes, glacial runoff is vital for agricultural, industrial, and basic water needs. Previous studies of low-latitude Andean glaciers suggest a precarious future due to contemporary warming. These studies have looked at trends in freezing level heights or observations of contemporary retreat. However, regional-scale understanding of low-latitude glacial responses to present and future climate change is limited, in part due to incomplete information about the extent and elevation distribution of low-latitude glaciers. The recently published Randolph Glacier Inventory (RGI) (5.0) provides the necessary information about the size and elevation distribution of low-latitude glaciers to begin such studies. We determine the contemporary equilibrium line altitudes (ELAs) for low-latitude Andean glaciers in the RGI, using a numerical energy balance ablation model driven with reanalysis and gridded data products. Contemporary ELAs tend to fall around the peak of the elevation histogram, with an exception being the southern-most outer tropical glaciers whose modeled ELAs tend to be higher than the elevation histogram for that region (see below figure). Also, we use the linear tends in temperature and precipitation from the contemporary climatology to extrapolate 21stcentury climate forcings. Modeled ELAs by the middle on the century are universally predicted to rise, with outer tropical ELAs rising more than the inner tropical glaciers. These trends continue through the end of the century. Finally, we explore how climate variables and parameters in our numerical model may vary for different warming scenarios from United Nation’s IPCC AR5 report. We quantify the impacts of these changes on ELAs for various climate change trajectories. These results support previous work on the precarious future of low latitude Andean glaciers, while providing a richer understanding of the glacial impacts of contemporary and future warming. Also, this work provides analysis of processes and feedbacks between different climate variables important to glacier mass balances in a warming world, improving predictions for the fate of low-latitude Andean glaciers.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86744", "section":"Cryosphere"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86745" } }
{"authors":"Aditya Gusain::Indian Institute of Technology Bombay--Mohit Mohanty::Indian Institute of Technology Bombay Indian Institute of Technology Bombay--Vittal H::Indian Institute of Technology Bombay--Subhankar Karmakar::Indian Institute of Technology Bombay--Subimal Ghosh::Indian Institute of Technology Bombay--Srinivasa Rao G::National Remote Sensing center--", "title":"H43I-1676: Assessment of future change in streamflow through identification of its association with precipitation in Mahanadi Basin, India under data scarce scenario", "abstract":"It is evident that change in climate alters the distribution of rainfall at different spatial and temporal scales all over the world. Quantification of change in streamflow through an understanding of the changes in rainfall pattern is challenging, particularly under data scarce situation. In order to accomplish this goal, we studied the statistical association between observed rainfall and streamflow in a large river basin, prone to various hydrologic extremes, particularly floods and droughts. One of the flood prone river basins in India, Mahanadi basin (covering an area of 0.14 million sq. km.) was selected and divided into number of sub-catchments. A set of statistical relationships between regional rainfall and streamflow for each sub-catchment was derived, which was assumed to be remained unaltered in future time period. Based on a comprehensive literature survey, 7 GCMs were selected for rainfall projection, which were reported as suitable particularly for the Indian subcontinent. General Circulation Models (GCMs) can be used to enumerate rainfall by considering various predictors such as temperature, humidity, wind velocity, geo-potential height etc. However, the difficulty lies in the coarser resolution of GCMs output, which ultimately restricts their application at a regional scale. Under such circumstances, downscaling techniques are used to project the rainfall at a required finer catchment scale. In the current study, a well recognized statistical downscaling technique utilizing classification and regression tree, and kernel regression was used. For validating purpose, the statistically derived streamflows were compared with the streamflow outputs simulated through the Variable Infiltration Capacity (VIC) model. The proposed methodology for assessment of changing pattern of streamflow under data scarce situation will be useful for sustainable management of water resources and future flood characterization.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86745", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86746" } }
{"authors":"KwangEun Kim::KIGAM Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources - KIGAM--", "title":"P11B-2079: The design of long wavelength planetary SAR sensor and its applications for monitoring shallow sub-surface of Moon and planets.", "abstract":"SAR observations over planetary surface have been conducted mainly in two ways. The first is the subsurface sounding, for example Mars Advanced Radar for Subsurface and Ionosphere Sounding (MARSIS) and Shallow Surface Radar (SHARAD), using ground penetration capability of long wavelength electromagnetic waves. On the other hand, imaging SAR sensors using burst mode design have been employed to acquire surface observations in the presence of opaque atmospheres such as in the case of Venus and Titan. We propose a lightweight SAR imaging system with P/L band wavelength to cover the vertical observation gap of these planetary radar observation schemes. The sensor is for investigating prominent surface and near-subsurface geological structures and physical characteristics. Such measurements will support landers and rover missions as well as future manned missions. We evaluate required power consumption, and estimate mass and horizontal resolution, which can be as good as 3-7 meters. Initial specifications for P/L dual band SARs for the lunar case at 130 km orbital altitude were designed already based on a assumptions that sufficient size antenna (>3m width diameter or width about 3m and >10kg weight) can be equipped. Useful science measurements to be obtained include: (1) derivation of subsurface regolith depth; 2) Surface and shallow subsurface radar imaging, together with radar ranging techniques such as radargrammetry and inteferometry. The concepts in this study can be used as an important technical basis for the future solid plant/satellite missions and already proposed for the 2018 Korean Lunar mission.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86746", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86748" } }
{"authors":"Hope Fillingim::Villanova University--Melanie Vile::Villanova University--", "title":"B13G-0709: Biological N2-fixation in Boreal Peatlands of Alberta Canada Following Acute N-Deposition: Down-Regulation and Subsequent Post-Recovery Projections.", "abstract":"Globally, boreal peatlands cover a mere 3-4 % of the Earth’s land surface, yet store ~ 30% of the world’s soil carbon and ~9-16% of global soil nitrogen. Biological N2-fixation is the primary input of new nitrogen (N) to bogs in Alberta. We have demonstrated that this process is down regulated in the presence of enhanced atmospheric N deposition such as that from the growing Oil Sands Mining Operations in northern Alberta Canada. An important question for understanding the long term function of bogs in Alberta is whether N2-fixation can recover upon cessation of N pollution, and if so, how quickly? Here we present our preliminary findings in pursuit of this question. We measured rates of biological N2-fixation using the acetylene reduction assay (ARA), with subsequent calibration using 15N2 on separate, but paired incubations. Sphagnum fuscum from bogs at two different sites from northern Alberta were incubated over the course of 3 years, in 3 experimentally added treatments in the field; controls, plots receiving no added N and no water, water only treatments (no added N), and plots that were fertilized with N at a rate of 20 kg·ha-1·yr-1, and plots which had been fertilized with 20 kg·ha-1·yr-1in 2012-2013, but not since. In 2014, the rates of N2-fixation in the 20 kg·ha-1·yr-1plots and the recovering 20 kg·ha-1·yr-1plots were not significantly different, but both were significantly lower than the controls (p<0.05). In 2015, control plots had significantly higher rates of N2-fixation than the plots that had previously received 20 kg·ha-1·yr-1 in 2012 and 2013, and the plots that had not received 20 kg·ha-1·yr-1 since 2013 had significantly higher rates of biological N2-fixation. These data suggest that in a low atmospheric N deposition scenario, and over a short time frame, peatlands of northern Alberta may be able to recover from chronic atmospheric N deposition.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86748", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86750" } }
{"authors":"Krzysztof Janowicz::University of California Santa Barbara--", "title":"IN33F-03: Ontology Design Patterns as Interfaces (invited)", "abstract":"In recent years ontology design patterns (ODP) have gained popularity among knowledge engineers. ODPs are modular but self-contained building blocks that are reusable and extendible. They minimize the amount of ontological commitments and thereby are easier to integrate than large monolithic ontologies. Typically, patterns are not directly used to annotate data or to model certain domain problems but are combined and extended to form data and purpose-driven local ontologies that serve the needs of specific applications or communities. By relying on a common set of patterns these local ontologies can be aligned to improve interoperability and enable federated queries without enforcing a top-down model of the domain. In previous work, we introduced ontological views as layer on top of ontology design patterns to ease the reuse, combination, and integration of patterns. While the literature distinguishes multiple types of patterns, e.g., content patterns or logical patterns, we propose to use them as interfaces here to guide the development of ontology-driven  systems.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86750", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86751" } }
{"authors":"Juan Carlos Villegas Lanza::Instituto Geofísico del Perú--Jean-Mathieu Nocquet::Géoazur - Université Nice Sophia Antipolis--Frederique Rolandone::University Pierre and Marie Curie Paris VI--Martin Vallee::Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris--Hernando Tavera::Instituto Geofísico del Perú--Francis Bondoux::GET Géosciences Environnement Toulouse--Trong Tran::National University of Civil Engineering Géoazur - Université Nice Sophia Antipolis--Xavier Martin::Géoazur - Université Nice Sophia Antipolis--Mohamed Chlieh::Geoazur--", "title":"S31A-2735: A Slow Slip and Seismic Swarm Sequence in a Weakly Coupled Subduction Zone in Northern Peru", "abstract":"Processes releasing the stress accumulated along subduction megathrusts show a great diversity in their seismic and aseismic signatures, and in the ratio between the two modes of slip. Deep (30-50km) Slow Slip Events (SSE) are often accompanied by tremors, accounting for less than 0.1% of the total moment release. Shallow (<20km) SSE show synchronous intense microseismicity, whose contribution is 0.1 to a few percent of the total moment release. At the other end of the spectrum, earthquake-afterslip sequences usually show an aseismic/seismic moment release ratio between 20 to 100%, with some unusual cases reaching 400%. Here we document a seismic/aseismic sequence along the weakly coupled northern Peru subduction zone that departs from previously observed categories. The sequence took place at shallow depth (<25km), lasted 7 months, and the synchronous seismicity accounts for ~25% of the total moment release equivalent to Mw 6.7. Unlike SSE which show a progressive acceleration of slip, rapid transient slip started immediately after two earthquakes, before slowing down at logarithmic decay, similarly to the afterslip following large earthquakes. The earthquake which triggered the largest acceleration and slip amount shares most characteristics of tsunami earthquakes and probably occurred in the conditionally stable part of the subduction interface. Taken separately, the moment released by the transient aseismic slip following this latter earthquake is >1000% of the co-seismic moment and the observed transient slip cannot be explained by classical models of afterslip. This sequence suggests that Seismic Swarms that are commonly observed at subduction megathrusts actually release much more stress than indicated by their cumulative seismic moment.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86751", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86752" } }
{"authors":"Sandra Villamizar::University of California Merced--Henry Pai::University of California Merced--Thomas Harmon::University of California Merced--", "title":"IN53B-1836: Producing Long-term Series of Whole-Stream Metabolism Using Readily Available Data", "abstract":"Continuous water quality and river discharge data that are readily available through government websites may be used to produce valuable information about key processes within a river ecosystem. In this work, we describe in detail the steps for acquisition and processing of river flow, dissolved oxygen, temperature, and specific conductance data that, combined with atmospheric data and physical properties of the river reach of interest, allow for the production of a long-term series of whole stream metabolism estimates, an important piece of information for the purposes of understanding the structure and function of river ecosystems. The restoration reach of the San Joaquin River in California (USA) has been intensively instrumented since 2010 and serves as an ideal case for testing this tool. The set of scripts, written in R code, can be used immediately for any other river in California for which the key parameters (river flow, dissolved oxygen, temperature, and specific conductivity) are available, and can be modified by the new users to fit their particular site conditions.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86752", "section":"Earth and Space Science Informatics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86754" } }
{"authors":"Xinyu Xu::School of geodesy and geomatics, Wuhan University--", "title":"G33B-1142: Coseismic gravity gradient change caused by the Japan Tohoku-Oki 2011 earthquake based on the GOCE observations", "abstract":"We use the GOCE gradiometry data spanning from November 2009 to May 2012 to detect the coseismic gravity gradient change caused by the Japan Tohoku-Oki 2011 earthquake event. Two global gravity field models up to degree and order 220 before and after this event are determined based on the least-squares method with the bandpass ARMA filter applied to the gradiometry data along the orbit. Because of the low accuracy in the low frequency of the gravity field model caused by the colored noises in SGG (Satellite Gravity Gradient) data, only the tailored SH coefficients of the models are used to compute the coseismic changes of gravity gradient components Vxx, Vyy, Vzz, Vxzin space domain. Considering the polar gap problem of GOCE satellite orbit, the zonal and near-zonal coefficients are excluded. The Gaussian filter is also applied to the model coefficients. The calculated gravity gradient changes based on the GOCE observations are compared with the corresponding modeled coseismic signal based upon the given fault slip model parameters. The results show that the coseismic gravity gradient signal could be recovered from the GOCE observations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86754", "section":"Geodesy"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86756" } }
{"authors":"Megan Rippy::University of California Irvine--Ana Deletic::Monash University--Wolfgang Gernjak::Catalan Institute for Water Research (ICRA)--", "title":"H32E-01: Urban Stormwater Quality: Linking Pesticide Variability To Our Sustainable Water Future", "abstract":"Climate change and global population growth demand creative, multidisciplinary, and multi-benefit approaches for sustaining adequate fresh water resources and protecting ecosystem health. Currently, a driving factor of aquatic ecosystem degradation (stormwater) is also one of the largest untapped urban freshwater resources. This suggests that ecosystem protection and potable water security might both be achieved via treating and capturing stormwater for human use (e.g., potable substitution). The viability of such a scheme, however, depends on 1) initial stormwater quality (e.g., the contaminants present and their associated human/environmental health risks), 2) the spatial and temporal variability of contaminants in stormwater, and 3) the capacity of existing technologies to treat those contaminants to fit for purpose standards. Here we present results from a four year study of urban stormwater conducted across ten catchments and four states in Australia that addresses these three issues relative to stormwater pesticides. In total, 19 pesticides were detected across all sites and times. In general, pesticide concentrations were lower than has been reported in other countries, including the United States, Canada and Europe. This is reflected in few exceedences of public health (< 1%) and aquatic ecosystem standards (0% for invertebrates and fish, < 1% for algae and plants). Interestingly, pesticide patterns were found to be stable across seasons, and years, but varied across catchments. These catchment-specific fingerprints may reflect preferential commercial product use, as they map closely to co-occurrence patterns in registered Australian products. Importantly, the presence of catchment-specific pesticide variability has clear management implications; namely, urban stormwater must be managed at the catchment level and target local contaminant suites in order to best achieve desired human use and environmental protection standards.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86756", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86757" } }
{"authors":"Thomas Sharp::Arizona State University--", "title":"MR11A-06: Precession electron diffraction in scanning transmission electron microscopy: phase, orientation and strain mapping at the nanometer scale", "abstract":"Precession electron diffraction is a technique used in scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) to collect electron diffraction patterns while precessing the beam in a cone around the optic axis of the microscope. Electrons are strongly scattered by matter, resulting in dynamical diffraction effects and complex intensity distributions. Precession diffraction produces patterns that are nearly kinematical and lack the complicated intensity distributions of dynamical scattering. These patterns are readily indexed by computer, which allows for the structural characterization of the sample at each pixel. This technique is analogous to electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD), but with higher spatial resolution. Like EBSD, precession diffraction is used to make phase and orientation maps in polycrystalline aggregates and deformed crystals. The technique also provides quantitative strain mapping at the nanometer scale for characterization of defects and coherent interfaces. This technique is especially useful for characterizing nano-scale intergrowths that are produced in high-pressure experiments and in naturally shocked samples. We are using this technique on our aberration corrects JEOL ARM200F STEM. Examples of experimentally and naturally transformed olivine will be presented.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86757", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86759" } }
{"authors":"Marcin Witek::California Institute of Technology--David Diner::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Michael Garay::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Feng Xu::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"A33E-0233: Improvements in dark water, low light-level AOD retrievals in MISR operational algorithm", "abstract":"Satellite remote sensing of aerosols is taking bold steps towards higher spatial resolutions, as evidenced by the newly released MODIS 3 km product and the soon to be released MISR 4.4 km product. Finer horizontal resolution allows for a better aerosol characterization in proximity to clouds—which is important for studying indirect aerosol effects—but also poses additional challenges due to various cloud artifact effects. It is therefore imperative to refine satellite algorithms to correctly interpret aerosol behavior in the proximity of clouds. For instance, MISR aerosol optical depth (AOD) retrievals frequently overestimate AODs in pristine oceanic areas, in particular close to Antarctica, as evidenced by comparison with Maritime Aerosol Network (MAN) observations. We trace the origin of this overestimation to stray light, or veiling light, being scattered more or less uniformly over the camera’s field of view and reducing the contrast of the primary image. We found that the MISR-MODIS radiance difference in dark areas correlates with average scene brightness within the whole MISR camera field of view. A simple, single parameter model is proposed to effect the corrections. Collocated MISR/MODIS pixels are used to fit the parameter in the MISR nadir camera. For the off-nadir cameras two alternative approaches are employed that are based on MISR radiances and radiative transfer model calculations. These two methods are prone to higher uncertainties, but suggest somewhat increasing correction values for the longer focal length cameras. Finally, the empirical corrections applied in the operational MISR retrieval algorithm substantially decrease AODs in analyzed cases, and lead to closer agreement with MAN and MODIS, proving the efficacy of the developed procedure.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86759", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86760" } }
{"authors":"Kiwamu Nishida::Earthquake Research Institute, University of Tokyo--", "title":"S31C-04: Body wave microseisms from a distant storm revealed by Hi-net data", "abstract":"Observations of microseisms were firmly established in 1940's. Their excitation sources are ocean swell activities. Microseisms from 0.1 to 0.5 Hz, which double the frequency, indicating the generation of the former through nonlinear wave-wave interaction of the latter. Because the swell activities are their sources, surface wave excitation is dominant.Recently body wave microseisms from a distant storm, however, have been focussed [e.g. Gerstoft et al. 2006]. They show clear teleseismic P waves excited by distant storms. A back-projection method could constrain the source distribution, which gives clues to their excitation mechanisms. Most studies focused, however, only vertical components. In this study, in order to constrain excitation mechanisms of microseisms, we conducted a 3-component array analysis using Hi-net operated by NIED, when a strong weather bomb hit the Atlantic ocean on Dec. 9th, 2014. We analyzed 3-component velocity-meters with a natural frequency of 1 Hz at 775 stations. The instrumental response was deconvolved by using the inverse filtering technique after reduction of common logger noise Their frequency-wavenumber spectra were calculated at 0.15 Hz. The spectra of a vertical component and a radial component show that clear teleseismic P-wave. The slowness of about 0.05 [s/km] and the back azimuth of -5 degrees are consistent with that of the P wave traveled from the weather bomb in the Atlantic ocean. The radial component shows SV wave with about 20% of P wave amplitudes. These observations could be explained by a single force source at the sea surface in the 1-D medium in the first order approximation. The transverse component also shows SH waves with about 10% of the P wave amplitude. The excitation source of P, SV and SH wave were located in the same small area by a backprojection analysis. These observations suggest that the steep topography and the thick sediment beneath the source area also affected the excitations.Observations of microseisms were firmly established in 1940's. Their excitation sources are ocean swell activities. Microseisms from 0.1 to 0.5 Hz, which double the frequency, indicating the generation of the former through nonlinear wave-wave interaction of the latter. Because the swell activities are their sources, surface wave excitation is dominant.Recently body wave microseisms from a distant storm, however, have been focussed [e.g. Gerstoft et al. 2006]. They show clear teleseismic P waves excited by distant storms. A back-projection method could constrain the source distribution, which gives clues to their excitation mechanisms. Most studies focused, however, only vertical components. In this study, in order to constrain excitation mechanisms of microseisms, we conducted a 3-component array analysis using Hi-net operated by NIED, when a strong weather bomb hit the Atlantic ocean on Dec. 9th, 2014. We analyzed 3-component velocity-meters with a natural frequency of 1 Hz at 775 stations. The instrumental response was deconvolved by using the inverse filtering technique after reduction of common logger noise. Their frequency-wavenumber spectra were calculated at 0.15 Hz. The spectra of a vertical component and a radial component show that clear teleseismic P-wave. The slowness of about 0.05 [s/km] and the back azimuth of -5 degrees are consistent with that of the P wave traveled from the weather bomb in the Atlantic ocean. The radial component shows SV wave with about 20% of P wave amplitudes. These observations can be explained by a single force source at the sea surface in the 1-D medium in the first order approximation. The transverse component shows SH waves with about 10% of the P wave amplitude. The excitation source of P, SV and SH wave were located in the same small area by a backprojection analysis. These observations suggest that the steep topography and the thick sediment beneath the source area also affected the excitations.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86760", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86761" } }
{"authors":"Salomón Saleme Vila::CICATA National Polytechnic Institute of Mexico CICATA National Polytechnic Institute of Mexico--David Rivas::Organization Not Listed--Rogelio Ortega Izaguirre::CICATA National Polytechnic Institute of Mexico--", "title":"A31C-0067: Photovoltaic Prospection in South Tamaulipas", "abstract":"Commercial monocrystalline silicon (c-Si), polycrystalline silicon (p-Si) and amorphous silicon (a-Si) photovoltaic (PV) panels are tested on real conditions in order to identify which of the aforementioned PV panels present the best performance in the city of Altamira, Tamaulipas (northeastern Mexico) and to evaluate the impact of the city’s climatic conditions over the electrical characteristics and power generation of the aforementioned PV panels. In situ direct solar irradiance and current-voltage characteristics (I-V) of each PV panel were taken from Monday to Friday at 11:00, 13:00 and 15:00 hours (GMT-6) with 3 repeats from 08/04/2014 to 07/31/2015. Also, daylong in situ direct solar irradiance, panel temperature, and I-V characteristics were taken from 8:00 to 20:30 hours with a 30-minute interval in synchrony with National Polytechnic Institute-owned CICATA-I meteorological station in order to cross-reference the experimental data with the station’s air temperature, specific humidity and global solar irradiance data. Up to June 2015, c-Si panel presented the best performance on real conditions with mean max power loss of 49% compared to the reference max power value followed by the p-Si with 54% mean max power loss and the a-Si panel with a 73% mean max power loss. The number of cloudy days, electrical resistance due to panel materials nature and meteorological impact are further discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86761", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86762" } }
{"authors":"Azar Hasanov::Colorado School of Mines--Manika Prasad::Colorado School of Mines--", "title":"MR41C-2663: Fluid flow and coupled poroelastic response in low-permeability rocks", "abstract":"Hydraulic transport properties of reservoir rocks are traditionally deﬁned as rock properties, responsible for the passage of ﬂuids through the porous rock sample, as well as their storage. These properties are also called permeability and storage capacity. The evaluation of both is an important part of any reservoir characterization workﬂow. A vivid example of the importance of the transport properties is the blooming business of unconventional oil and gas production. Tight formations with ultra-low permeabilities and storage capacities, which have never been perceived as reservoir rocks, today are actively exploited for oil and gas. This tremendous achievement in petroleum science and technology was only possible due to hydraulic frac- turing, which is essentially a process of enhancing permeability and storage capacity by creating a swarm of microcracks in the rock. The knowledge of hydraulic and poroelastic properties is also essential for proper simulations of diﬀusive pore ﬂuid ﬂow in petroleum reservoirs, as well as aquifers. This work is devoted to an integrated study of low-permeability rocks’ hydraulic and poroe- lastic properties as measured with the oscillating pore pressure experiment. The oscillating pore pressure method is traditionally used to measure hydraulic transport properties. We modiﬁed the method and built an experimental setup, capable of measuring all aforementioned rock properties simultaneously. The mea- surements were carried out for four sub-millidarcy rock samples at a range of oscillation frequencies and eﬀective stresses. An apparent frequency dependence of permeability was observed. Measured frequency dispersion of drained poroelastic properties indicates an intrinsically inelastic nature of the porous mineral rock frame. Standard Linear Model demon- strated the best ﬁt to the experimental dispersion data. We established that hydraulically-measured storage capacities are in good agreement with elastically-derived ones. We also introduce a novel method, which allowed us to estimate the permeability from the full range of acquired frequency data by utilizing a nonlinear least- squares regression. The results of numerical simulation of oscillatory ﬂuid ﬂow conﬁrm both the analytical solution and the experimental data.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86762", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86763" } }
{"authors":"Stephanie Granger::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Konstantinos Andreadis::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Narendra Das::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Denis Macharia::Regional Center for Mapping Resources for Development--", "title":"PA31A-2144: Capacity Building in NASA Remote Sensing Data for Meteorological and Agricultural Communities in East Africa", "abstract":"Across the globe, planners and decision makers are hampered by a lack of historic data and scant in situ observations on which to base policy and action plans. Data is often sorely lacking in poorly developed regions such as East Africa where people are vulnerable to a changing climate, extreme weather events, and economies and food security are tied directly to rain fed agriculture or pastoral cultures. NASA global remote sensing observations and research are promising in this regard, as they have great potential to inform policy- and decision-making at global, regional and even local scales the world over, However that potential is not realized as often as it should for a variety of reasons: the data stores are often impenetrable requiring special expertise to “crack the code”, sustainability of observations remains a concern, and research and data are not focused on applications, thus results don’t “fit” in existing tools or are developed for a short-term science objective without long-term use in mind. Although there are good examples of the use of NASA Earth Science research and observations for applications, capacity is lacking and must be built to advance the use of remote sensing for applications and to ease transition of research to the stakeholder. Capacity building is a critical component to transition Earth science research results to stakeholder communities, and is more than traditional training,, it has been described as….”the process of developing and strengthening the skills, instincts, abilities, processes and resources that organizations and communities need to survive, adapt, and thrive in the fast-changing world. Best practices and lessons learned from recent capacity building efforts for Agricultural and Environmental Ministires in East African in support of a NASA-SERVIR Applied Science Project to provide estimates of hydrologic extremes tied to crop yield are described.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86763", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86764" } }
{"authors":"Amy Frappier::Skidmore College--", "title":"PP34A-04: Can Convergent Cross Mapping Untangle Idiosyncratic Speleothem Proxy Records to Reveal the Structure of Shared Climate Forcing?", "abstract":"Rapid growth and development of speleothem paleoclimatology has generated diverse and important new terrestrial paleoenvironmental proxy records that increasingly illuminate both the enormous potential and great complexity of cave proxy systems and speleothem data. Speleothem records commonly exhibit complex covariation patterns between proxy variables (i.e. carbon and oxygen isotopes, various trace element concentrations and ratios, stratigraphic characteristics, growth rates, etc...). Such covariation patterns frequently change sign and magnitude over time, and often show periods without significant correlation that alternate with times with strongly coupled behavior. These patterns are evident when comparing records between sites and stalagmites, and even within a single stalagmite. Instability in covariation patterns and low long-term correlations both limit our confidence in applying speleothems proxy transfer functions over long time periods. Are these complex covariation patterns meaningful or merely mirages? When two speleothem records show the same result, replication is considered by the community to be evidence that both records are highly sensitive to a common climate signal and are thus reliable proxies for that climate signal. Signals derived from a single speleothem dataset could be noise, and thus of limited value until it is validated by the replication test. Are speleothems naturally idiosyncratic and noisy? Must all speleothem records be duplicated to establish reliability? I consider whether Convergent Cross Mapping (CCM) may offer a fruitful approach to these problems. CCM is a powerful statistical tool developed in George Sugihara’s lab for complex dynamical systems that tests the direction of causality and strength of forcing among multiple time-series variables. I apply CCM to speleothem timeseries records to 1) reconstruct the underlying state climate variable of interest over time (in this case, precipitation), and 2) determine the directions of causality and strength of coupling, both among these proxy records and with respect to precipitation. The efficacy of CCM for unraveling the idiosyncracies of speleothems and their complex covariation patterns, as well as the implications of CCM for speleothem paleoclimatology is discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86764", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86765" } }
{"authors":"Darren Gravley::University of Canterbury--Guilherme Gualda::Vanderbilt University--Lydia Harmon::Vanderbilt University--Samantha Tramontano::Vanderbilt University--Ana Carolina Luchetti::Universidade Estadual Paulista--Antonio Nardy::Universidade Estadual Paulista--", "title":"T32D-08: Zooming into the Paraná-Etendeka silicic volcanics, southern Brasil: a physical volcanological approach", "abstract":"Paraná-Etendeka volcanism led to the opening of the Atlantic Ocean during the early Cretaceous. Most Paraná research has focused on the regional scale geochemistry and geochronology. Complementarily, we have taken a physical volcanological approach to elucidate the styles and locations of silicic eruptions with a focus on extrusive vs. explosive varieties, and an ultimate goal to characterise the crustal magmatic conditions. Through satellite to microscopic observations we can zoom from volcanic edifice and deposit morphologies, remarkably preserved in the Mesozoic landscape, to primary microscopic textures. Lava domes appear in clusters with high relief and are surrounded by lower flat-topped terraces comprised of multiple tabular-shaped packages with conspicuous horizontal jointing. Joint thickness coincides with layering from mm-scale laminations to larger lens-shaped blobs up to 20 cm thick and more than a metre long. These layered deposits appear to be compressed and/or stretched into the finer laminations and grade up into the fatter lens-shaped blobs. In other regions, extensive plateaus dominate the landscape with flat-lying flow packages continuous over 10’s of kilometres and possibly further. Rheomorphism is evident in places with sub-parallel joints that grade up into a zone of deformation where curvilinear to overturned joint patterns reflect lateral forcing in a more ductile flow regime. Microscopically the blobs and surrounding matrix are almost indistinguishable except for subtle differences in spherulite textures, zonal alteration and distribution of crystal sizes. Although our research is relatively nascent, our observations suggest eruptions may have ranged from edifice building effusive ones to more explosive ones, albeit possibly relatively low fire fountains feeding hybridised lava/pyroclastic flows. Some of these flows are extensive, tens to possibly hundreds of kilometres long, consistent with high eruption rates of hot magma. These interpretations are consistent with published temperatures as hot as 1050 degrees for these silicic magmas. Preliminary work focusing on glass compositions and coexisting phase assemblages within the blobs reveals that silicic magmas resided in the shallow crust prior to eruption.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86765", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86766" } }
{"authors":"Ata Elias::American University of Beirut--", "title":"The Qartaba Backthrust: An Active Fault In Central Mt-Lebanon.", "abstract":"Compression along the N25E, Lebanese Restraining Bend of the ~N-S striking Dead Sea Transform is accommodated by folding and thrusting within the Mt-Lebanon range (~3100m asl). Mt-Lebanon Thrust system lying west of Mt-Lebanon is an east-dipping crustal ramp best represented onshore by a west-dipping monocline known as the Lebanese Flexure. Other active structures accommodating compression are west-vergent folds and east-dipping thrusts, mostly outside central Mt-Lebanon. The Qartaba Fault, ~14km long, striking NE-SE in central Mt-Lebanon is thus an exception that we first document. It runs along the base of the eastern flank of Jej-Mountain: a wide box-shaped anticline. The Lebanese Flexure forms the western flank of Jej-Mountain. In many places of the eastern flank along the Qartaba Fault, the Mid-Jurassic layers of the mountain form a steep, NE-SW trending, 200m high, cliff overthrusting nearly vertical, east-dipping layers of the Upper-Jurassic to Lower Cretaceous units. The faulted contact in-between dips 30-35 degrees westward in opposite vergence to the Flexure and the overall folded structures of Mt-Lebanon range. We interpret this Qartaba Fault as a west-dipping backthrust ramp connected at depth with the east-dipping, blind ramp of the Lebanese Flexure. In places towards the base of the steep cliff an irregular, smooth, lighter-colored surface is located at the tip of the fault trace between the Jurassic rocks of the hanging wall and the slope material accumulated at its base. The presence of polished patches and its position strongly suggest a co-seismic origin of the scarp with a relatively recent rupture free face. In a trench we opened over the fault trace at base of the scarp, we uncovered alluvial material on the eastern side clearly folded and faulted in a thrust wedge position underlying the blocks of Jurassic rocks to the west. Preliminary Radiocarbon ages show that the sediments and deformation are Holocene in age. Additional dating results are expected. The Jej-Mountain is an east-vergent anticline growing over the west-dipping Qartaba backthrust in central Mt-Lebanon, contributing to the accommodation of shortening and compression along the restraining bend. This is in contradiction with all previous studies of the area.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86766", "section":""} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86767" } }
{"authors":"Nathan Sheldon::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Jennifer Cotton::University of Utah--Michael Hren::University of Connecticut--Ethan Hyland::University of Washington Seattle Campus--Selena Smith::University of Michigan Ann Arbor--Caroline Strömberg::University of Washington Seattle Campus--", "title":"T21B-2814: Bringing organic carbon isotopes and phytoliths to the table as additional constraints on paleoelevation", "abstract":"A commonly used tool in paleotectonic and paleoaltimetry studies is the oxygen isotopic composition of authigenic carbonates formed that formed in lakes or soils, with both spatial (e.g., shoreline to mountain top) or temporally resolved records potentially providing constraints. However, in many cases there is a substantial spread in the oxygen isotope data for a given time period, often to the point of allowing for essentially any interpretation of the data depending upon how they have been used by the investigator. One potential way of distinguishing between different potential paleotectonic or paleoaltimetric interpretations is to use carbon isotope and plant microfossil (phytolith) analyses from the same paleosols to screen the oxygen isotope data by looking for evidence of evaporative enrichment. For example, if both inorganic (carbonate) and organic carbon isotopes are measured from the same paleosol, then in it possible to determine if the two isotope record equilibrium conditions or if they record disequilibrium driven by kinetic effects. In the former case, the oxygen isotope results can be considered reliable whereas in the latter case, the oxygen isotope results can be considered unreliable and could be culled from the interpretation. Similarly, because the distribution of C4 plants varies as a function of temperature and elevation, the presence/absence or abundance of C4 plant phytoliths, or of carbon isotope compositions that require a component of C4 vegetation can also be used to constrain paleoelevation by providing a maximum elevation constraint. Worked examples will include the late Miocene-Pliocene of Catamarca, Argentina, where phytoliths and organic carbon isotopes provide a maximum elevation constraint and can be used to demonstrate that oxygen isotopes do not provide a locally useful constraint on paleoelevation, and Eocene-Miocene of southwestern Montana where organic matter and phytoliths can be used to select between different potential uplift histories as indicated by pedogenic carbonate oxygen isotope data.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86767", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86768" } }
{"authors":"Megumi Sugimoto::Kyushu University--Yandejia Song::Kyushu University--", "title":"ED31C-0916: There is a strong need for a single unified textbook even though education in disaster mitigation covers many fields", "abstract":"Areas of scientific specialties have been segmentalized nowadays. Each natural hazard are researched by scientific researchers. A huge variety of textbooks on one or few natural hazard are published by a single researcher in the world. There are possibilities are several natural disaster in one place. People have to learn from each hazard. However such disaster textbook is not unified education publish. Education in disaster mitigation covers many fields. There is a strong need for a single unified textbook. When I teach disaster education to children in kindergartens and schools, I understand students are confused by each different direction in such textbooks. “Doctor, which is right when a earthquake happens, cover my head or go out of a building? ” I would like to discuss what the most valuable disaster textbook is as my following disatser handbook with audiences. This is publisehd for developping countries. You can freely download UNESCO disaster handbook following URL:http://www.icharm.pwri.go.jp/publication/pdf/handbook_on_local_disaster_management_experiences.pdf", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86768", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86769" } }
{"authors":"Vineel Kumar Reddy Yettella::CIRES--Jennifer Kay::University of Colorado at Boulder--", "title":"A12B-08: How will precipitation change in extratropical cyclones as the planet warms?", "abstract":"The majority of midlatitude precipitation occurs in extratropical cyclones. The purpose of this study is to understand how and why precipitation changes in these cyclones due to global warming. Daily precipitation fields from the Community Earth System Model (CESM) Large Ensemble Project are used for this purpose. Extratropical cyclone centers during three periods (1986 - 2005, 2016 - 2035 and 2081 - 2100 representing the present day, the near future and the far future respectively) are identified using a filtering algorithm based on pressure gradients typical of extratropical cyclone centers. For each cyclone center, the surrounding precipitation field is interpolated from the CESM grid onto a radial cap centered on the cyclone center. Average precipitation fields are calculated for the three periods to obtain ` cyclone composites` . In agreement with the warm conveyor belt model, the cyclone composites for the three periods have a comma-shaped precipitation band with maximum precipitation close to the cyclone center. The near future and the far future composites are compared with the present day composite to identify locations of significant change (at 95% confidence). Statistically significant precipitation increases are found both for the near future and the far future, especially near the cyclone center. To identify the processes contributing to these changes, we decompose precipitation change into two parts - one part that is due to changes in dynamics (mean cyclone wind speed) and another part that is due to changes in thermodynamics (mean cyclone water vapor path). We find that precipitation increases occur primarily due to changes in thermodynamics. We will also present ongoing work to investigate changes in cyclone location and density in a warming climate and also investigate land-ocean and hemispheric differences in cyclone charactersitics.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86769", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86770" } }
{"authors":"Ronald Muchelo::International Institute of Tropical Agriculture University of Sydney--Veronica N.E Uzokwe::International Institute of Tropical Agriculture--Inakwu Odeh::University of Sydney--", "title":"B34C-03: Urban Intensification and Expansion in Sub-Saharan Africa: Impacts on Urban Agriculture and Food Security", "abstract":"In Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), urban intensification and expansion are increasing at alarming rates due to rapid population growth and rural-to-urban migration. This has led to the premise that the proportion of SSA urban residents most vulnerable to food insecurity is the highest in the world. Using a focused survey and multi-temporal (decadal) land use/cover classification of Landsat images, we explored the effect of urban intensification and expansion on urban agriculture and food security, focusing on a megacity and a regional center in Uganda: Kampala and Mbarara, respectively. We found that food insecurity arose due to a number of reasons, among which are: i) expansion and intensification of of urban settlements into previously productive agricultural lands in urban and peri-urban areas; ii) loss of predominantly young (rural agricultural) adult labor force to urban centers, leading to decline in rural food production; iii) lack of proper urban planning incorporating green and agricultural development leading to low productive market garden systems. We discussed these outcomes in light of existing studies which estimated that urban agriculture alone supports over 800 million people globally and accounts for 15–20% of world food supply. In spite of this relatively low contribution by urban/peri-urban agriculture, it probably accounts for higher proportion of food supply to urban poor in SSA and thus are most vulnerable to the loss of urban and peri-urban agricultural land. Further recommendations require policy makers and urban planners to team up to design a suitable framework for sustainable urban planning and development.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86770", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86771" } }
{"authors":"Dean Djokic::ESRI--Nawajish Noman::ESRI--Steve Kopp::ESRI--", "title":"H43A-1469: Modular GIS Framework for National Scale Hydrologic and Hydraulic Modeling Support", "abstract":"Geographic information systems (GIS) have been extensively used for pre- and post-processing of hydrologic and hydraulic models at multiple scales. An extensible GIS-based framework was developed for characterization of drainage systems (stream networks, catchments, floodplain characteristics) and model integration. The framework is implemented as a set of free, open source, Python tools and builds on core ArcGIS functionality and uses geoprocessing capabilities to ensure extensibility. Utilization of COTS GIS core capabilities allows immediate use of model results in a variety of existing online applications and integration with other data sources and applications. The poster presents the use of this framework to downscale global hydrologic models to local hydraulic scale and post process the hydraulic modeling results and generate floodplains at any local resolution. Flow forecasts from ECMWF or WRF-Hydro are downscaled and combined with other ancillary data for input into the RAPID flood routing model. RAPID model results (stream flow along each reach) are ingested into a GIS-based scale dependent stream network database for efficient flow utilization and visualization over space and time. Once the flows are known at localized reaches, the tools can be used to derive the floodplain depth and extent for each time step in the forecast at any available local resolution. If existing rating curves are available they can be used to relate the flow to the depth of flooding, or synthetic rating curves can be derived using the tools in the toolkit and some ancillary data/assumptions. The results can be published as time-enabled spatial services to be consumed by web applications that use floodplain information as an input. Some of the existing online presentation templates can be easily combined with available online demographic and infrastructure data to present the impact of the potential floods on the local community through simple, end user products. This framework has been successfully used in both the data rich environments as well as in locales with minimum available spatial and hydrographic data.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86771", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86772" } }
{"authors":"Ben (Abdollah) Jarihani::University of Queensland--", "title":"H43H-1645: Back to the Future: Have Remotely Sensed Digital Elevation Models Improved Hydrological Parameter Extraction?", "abstract":"Digital Elevation Models (DEMs) that accurately replicate both landscape form and processes are critical to support modeling of environmental processes. Pre-processing analysis of DEMs and extracting characteristics of the watershed (e.g., stream networks, catchment delineation, surface and subsurface flow paths) is essential for hydrological and geomorphic analysis and sediment transport. This study investigates the status of the current remotely-sensed DEMs in providing advanced morphometric information of drainage basins particularly in data sparse regions. Here we assess the accuracy of three available DEMs: (i) hydrologically corrected “H-DEM” of Geoscience Australia derived from the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) data; (ii) the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer Global Digital Elevation Model (ASTER GDEM) version2 1-arc-second (~30 m) data; and (iii) the 9-arc-second national GEODATA DEM-9S ver3 from Geoscience Australia and the Australian National University. We used ESRI’s geospatial data model, Arc Hydro and HEC-GeoHMS, designed for building hydrologic information systems to synthesize geospatial and temporal water resources data that support hydrologic modeling and analysis. A coastal catchment in northeast Australia was selected as the study site where very high resolution LiDAR data are available for parts of the area as reference data to assess the accuracy of other lower resolution datasets. This study provides morphometric information for drainage basins as part of the broad research on sediment flux from coastal basins to Great Barrier Reef, Australia. After applying geo-referencing and elevation corrections, stream and sub basins were delineated for each DEM. Then physical characteristics for streams (i.e., length, upstream and downstream elevation, and slope) and sub-basins (i.e., longest flow lengths, area, relief and slopes) were extracted and compared with reference datasets from LiDAR. Results showed that, in the absence of high-precision and high resolution DEM data, ASTER GDEM or SRTM DEM can be used to extract common morphometric relationship which are widely used for hydrological and geomorphological modelling.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86772", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86773" } }
{"authors":"Volker Hochschild::University Tuebingen--", "title":"H41F-1399: The Hydrological Cycle on the Tibetan Plateau - Observed by Multisensoral Remote Sensing Methods", "abstract":"Climate change and its potential effects are of global interest. Lake ice and snow coverage act as effective indicators of climate change due to their sensitivity to climate elements (like air temperature in the case of the lake ice), and can be observed on a large-scale with the help of remote sensing. The lakes on the Tibetan Plateau are important indicators for the development of the high mountain ecosystems facing the impacts of future climatic warming on runoff from snow and ice. Many of these Tibetan lakes are remote and hard to access, so multi-sensoral remote sensing is a valuable tool to generate hydrological relevant information as modeling input (land cover, soil moisture, trends in mountain lake ice cover, etc.) or validation base (lake level changes) . Tibetan lakes are remote and hard to access. For the monitoring of the lake ice, the first and the last day of the partial ice cover and the period of total ice cover are defined on the basis of temporal high temporal resolution MODIS data. The larger lakes were compared and put into regional groups in order to delineate and define different local trends. For obtaining a better spatial resolution for the calculation of the ice covered area, additional medium and high resolution optical and microwave data (ERS-1, ERS-2, ENVISAT A-SAR, LANDSAT, Kompsat-2, RapidEye) were considered, which at the same time, have a smaller temporal resolution. By means of correlation of the different data, the respective advantages of each data type are merged and were then exploited for the exaction of the iced surface and calculation of its area extent calculation. The study is enhanced by the use of passive microwave data (SSM/I, AMSR-E) which provides very high temporal resolution information as validation input. Simultaneously TerraSAR-X ScanSAR data was analysed for the whole winter period 2011 (December until April) in order to derive the spatial distribution of different ice types. The snow cover is an important intermediate storage of water and plays a crucial role in the water budget of the Tibetan endorheic lakes. However little is known about it since their contribution to runoff is mostly unknown as well as the losses through sublimation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86773", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86774" } }
{"authors":"Jenielyn Padrones::Akita University--Akira Imai::Akita University--Ryohei Takahashi::Akita University--Jillian Aira Gabo::Kyushu University--Kenichiro Tani::National Museum of Nature and Science--", "title":"V23B-3125: Petrogenesis, Geochemistry and REE Mineralization of the Ilmenite-series Granitoids in Northern Palawan, Philippines", "abstract":"A sliver of the Palawan Continental Block associated with the Late Yanshanian magmatism was recently recognized in northern Palawan, Philippines. This intrusive unit is the Late Cretaceous Daroctan granites. This granitic intrusive body, as well as the Middle Miocene Kapoas granitoids, were studied for their petrogenesis. The REE mineralization was also examined because of the I-type and ilmenite-series character of the granitoids and the close spatial and temporal relationship with the granitic units in southern and eastern China, which are viable sources for ion-adsorption type REE mineralization. The granitic intrusive rocks being investigated in this study are composed of biotite granodiorite and biotite granites. Both intrusive units are characterized by high-K calc-alkaline, intermediate I and S-types, and peraluminous. Despite the difference in ages, the geochemistry of both intrusive units shows distinct similarities which suggest same source materials, the partial melting of middle to lower continental crust. The granitoids in the Kapoas show higher light rare earth element (LREE) enrichment than that in the Daroctan but the weathered granitic crusts show higher enrichment in the Daroctan granites compared to the parent granitic rocks. Sequential leaching extraction for REE, Y, and Nb using 8 reagents which selectively dissolved REEs with different mode of occurence (i.e. water soluble, ion-exchangeable salts, Pb- displaceable, acid soluble, Mn-oxide occluded, organically-bound, amorphous Fe-oxide occluded, and crystalline Fe-oxide occluded) show that the Daroctan granites has a potential of ion-adsorption type REE resource with 60 – 73% adsorbed ΣREE. On the other hand, about 18 – 28% adsorbed ΣREE was extracted in the Kapoas granitoid samples. Only monazite occurs as the residual REE-bearing mineral in the Kapoas granitoids, while monazite and xenotime occur in the Daroctan granite. In both samples, mica minerals were altered to vermiculite, which further resulted in a loss of K and addition of P and Cl in the vermiculite grains. Cerianite with Fe and Mn occurs at the edges of the vermiculite in the sample of Daroctan granite.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86774", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86775" } }
{"authors":"Daisuke Tsumune::Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry--Takaki Tsubono::Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry--Michio Aoyama::Fukushima University--Kazuhiro Misumi::Central Research Institute of Electic Power Industry--Yutaka Tateda::Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry--", "title":"B11K-07: Behaviour of oceanic 137Cs following the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant accident for four years simulated numerically by a regional ocean model", "abstract":"A series of accidents at the Fukushima Dai-ichi Nuclear Power Plant (1F NPP) following the earthquake and tsunami of 11 March 2011 resulted in the release of radioactive materials to the ocean by two major pathways, direct release from the accident site and atmospheric deposition.We reconstructed spatiotemporal variability of 137Cs activity in the regional ocean for four years by numerical model, such as a regional scale and the North Pacific scale oceanic dispersion models, an atmospheric transport model, a sediment transport model, a dynamic biological compartment model for marine biota and river runoff model. Direct release rate of 137Cs were estimated for four years after the accident by comparing simulated results and observed activities very close to the site. The estimated total amounts of directly release was 3.6±0.7 PBq. Directly release rate of 137Cs decreased exponentially with time by the end of December 2012 and then, was almost constant. Decrease rate were quite small after 2013. The daily release rate of 137Cs was estimated to be the order of magnitude of 1010 Bq/day by the end of March 2015. The activity of directly released 137Cs was detectable only in the coastal zone after December 2012. Simulated 137Cs activities attributable to direct release were in good agreement with observed activities, a result that implies the estimated direct release rate was reasonable. There is no observed data of 137Cs activity in the ocean from 11 to 21 March 2011. Observed data of marine biota should reflect the history of 137Cs activity in this early period. We reconstructed the history of 137Cs activity in this early period by considering atmospheric deposition, river input, rain water runoff from the 1F NPP site. The comparisons between simulated 137Cs activity of marine biota by a dynamic biological compartment and observed data also suggest that simulated 137Cs activity attributable to atmospheric deposition was underestimated in this early period. The simulated river flux of 137Cs to the ocean did not effect on 137Cs activity in the ocean even if the parameters in this simulation have uncertainties because of the lack of observed data in rivers in the earlier period.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86775", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86776" } }
{"authors":"Stephanie Granger::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Ali Behrangi::NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory--", "title":"H21O-06: A Simple Drought Product and Indicator Derived from Temperature and Relative Humidity Observed by the Atmospheric InfraRed Sounder (AIRS)", "abstract":"In the United States, drought results in agricultural losses, impacts to industry, power and energy production, natural resources, municipal water supplies and human health making it one of the costliest natural hazards in the nation. Monitoring drought is therefore critical to help local governments, resource managers, and other groups make effective decisions, yet there is no single definition of drought, and because of the complex nature of drought there is no universal best drought indicator. Remote sensing applications in drought monitoring are advantageous due to the large spatial and temporal frequency of observations, leading to a better understanding of the spatial extent of drought and its duration, and in detecting the onset of drought and its intensity. NASA Earth Observing System (EOS)-era data have potential for monitoring and assessing drought and many are already used either directly or indirectly for drought monitoring. Land Surface Temperature (LST) and Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) observations from the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectro-radiometer (MODIS) sensor are widely used for agricultural and environmental plant-stress monitoring via the USDM, the VegDRI project and FEWSNet. However there remain underutilized sources of information from NASA satellite observations that may have promise for characterizing and understanding meteorological drought. Once such sensor is NASA’s Advanced Infra-Red Sounder (AIRS) aboard the Aqua satellite. AIRS and it’s sister sensor the Advanced Microwave Sounding Unit (AMSU) that together provide meteorological information of high relevance to meteorological drought, e.g., profiles of water vapor, surface air temperature, and precipitation. Recent work undertaken to develop simple indicators of drought based on temperature and relative humidity from the AIRS suite of instruments is promising. Although there are more sophisticated indicators developed through the application of a variety of models and algorithms, these indicators are based solely on observations and can be applied globally. We will review advantages and progress thus far in the development of indicators of meteorological drought and severity derived from AIRS.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86776", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86778" } }
{"authors":"Raul Brens::Macquarie University--Frances Jenner::Carnegie Institution Open University--Emma Bullock::National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution--Erik Hauri::Carnegie Institution for Science Washington--Simon Turner::Macquarie University--Tracy Rushmer::Macquarie University--", "title":"V43C-3172: Insights into mantle heterogeneities: mid-ocean ridge basalt tapping an ocean island magma source in the North Fiji Basin", "abstract":"The North Fiji Basin (NFB), and connected Lau Basin, is located in a complex area of volcanism. The NFB is a back-arc basin (BAB) that is a result of an extinct subduction zone, incorporating the complicated geodynamics of two rotating landmasses: Fiji and the Vanuatu island arc. Collectively this makes the spreading centers of the NFB the highest producing spreading centers recorded. Here we present volatile concentrations, major, and trace element data for a previously undiscovered triple junction spreading center in the NFB. We show our enrichment samples contain some of the highest water contents yet reported from (MORB). The samples from the NFB exhibit a combination of MORB-like major chemical signatures along with high water content similar to ocean island basalts (OIB). This peculiarity in geochemistry is unlike other studied MORB or back-arc basin (to our knowledge) that is not attributed to subduction related signatures. Our results employ the use of volatiles (carbon dioxide and water) and their constraints (Nb and Ce) combined with trace element ratios to indicate a potential source for the enrichment in the North Fiji Basin. The North Fiji Basin lavas are tholeiitic with similar major element composition as averaged primitive normal MORB; with the exception of averaged K2O and P2O5, which are still within range for observed normal MORB. For a mid-ocean ridge basalt, the lavas in the NFB exhibit a large range in volatiles: H2O (0.16-0.9 wt%) and CO2 (80-359 ppm). The NFB lavas have volatile levels that exceed the range of MORB and trend toward a more enriched source. In addition, when compared to MORB, the NFB lavas are all enriched in H2O/Ce. La/Sm values in the NFB lavas range from 0.9 to 3.8 while, Gd/Yb values range from 1.2 to 2.5. The NFB lavas overlap the MORB range for both La/Sm (~1.1) and Gd/Yb (~1.3). However, they span a larger range outside of the MORB array. High La/Sm and Gd/Yb ratios (>1) are indications of deeper melting within the stability field of garnet and/or spinel lherzolite, suggesting that the source of these lavas may stem from MORB mixing with an enriched plume (OIB) source. The discovery of these magmatic signatures beneath the North Fiji Basin is important in understanding the heterogeneities of volatiles in the mantle, in addition to linking deeper mantle and subsurface crustal processes.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86778", "section":"Volcanology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86779" } }
{"authors":"Fabien Kenig::University of Illinois at Chicago--Luoth Chou::University of Illinois at Chicago--Christopher McKay::NASA Ames Research Center--William Jackson::Texas Tech University--Peter Doran::Univ Illinois at Chicago--Alison Murray::Desert Research Institute Reno--Christian Fritsen::Desert Research Institute Reno--", "title":"P33A-2122: PERCHLORATE AND VOLATILES IN THE BRINE OF LAKE VIDA (ANTARCTICA): IMPLICATION FOR THE ANALYSIS OF MARS SEDIMENTS", "abstract":"A cold (-13.4 °C), saline (188 psu) evaporative brine is encapsulated in the thick (> 27 m) ice of Lake Vida (McMurdo Dry Valleys, Antarctica). The Lake Vida brine (LVBr), which contains abundant dissolved organic carbon (48.2 mmol/L), support an active but slow microbial community. LVBr contains oxychlorines with 50 μg/L of perchlorate and 11 μg/L of chlorate. The McMurdo Dry Valleys have often been considered as a good Mars analog. The oxychlorine-rich brine of Lake Vida constitutes a potential equivalent to perchlorate-rich preserved saline liquid water on Mars. We report here on the artifacts created by oxychlorines upon analysis of volatiles and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) of LVBr by direct immersion (DI) and head space (HS) solid phase micro extraction (SPME) gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GCMS). We compare analytical blanks to a standard containing 40 μg/L of perchlorate and to actual LVBr sample runs. All blanks, perchlorate blanks and samples were analyzed using two types of SPME fibers, CarboxenTM/polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and divinylbenzene (DVB)/ PDMS. The similarities and differences between our results and those obtained by the Sample Analysis at Mars instruments of the rover Curiosity are discussed. The volatiles evolved from LVBr upon analysis with DI- and HS-SPME GCMS are dominated by CO2, dichloromethane, HCl, and volatile organic sulfur compounds (VOSCs, such as DMS, DMDS). The volatiles also include oxygenated compounds such as acids and ketones, aromatic compounds, hydrocarbons, chlorinated compounds (dominated by dichloromethane). Apart from the VOSCs, short chain hydrocarbons and some functionalized compounds derived from the brine itself, all compounds observed are artifacts formed upon oxychlorine breakdown in the injector of the GCMS. The distribution of aromatic compounds seems to be directly dependant on the type of SPME fiber used. The perchlorate blanks show a clear pattern of carbon limitation, likely affecting the type and abundance of compounds produced. This suggests that carbon limited perchlorates blanks are not satisfactory for comparison to the analysis of oxychlorine containing samples. Acknowledgment: NASA ASTEP NAG5-12889 (PTD), NSF awards ANT-0739681 (AEM, CHF) and ANT-0739698 (PTD, FK) supported this work.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86779", "section":"Planetary Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86780" } }
{"authors":"Takashi Fujii::AIST - National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology--Masao Sorai::AIST--", "title":"H41C-1336: Impact of salinity on threshold pressure of mudstone in sealing integrity processes of CO2.", "abstract":"CO2 capture and storage (CCS) technology is a vital tool for deep reduction of CO2 emission from large point sources (e.g., Power generations, Cement and Steel manufacturing plants etc.), and understanding of fate of storing CO2 migration into reservoirs is significantly an important step for CO2 geological storage safety. Several measurements of CO2/water/solid (rock) contact angle related strongly to CO2 migration into pores of rocks have been conducted so far. These findings indicated commonly that water wetting onto mineral surface changes in supercritical CO2 (scCO2) state even though using both pendant and sessile drops and its effect increases as salinity increases, leading to decrease a sealing integrity i.e., threshold pressure of caprock including mudstone and/or shale. However, such mechanisms of scCO2/water/rock interaction are now still being uncleared. Our objective of this study is to investigate an effect of salinity on threshold pressure of natural mudstone, which takes from Kazusa group of Boso peninsula in Japan, in CO2/brine system in order to provide an insight for better understanding of mechanisms of CO2/water (brine)/rock interaction at temperature of 40° and pore pressures of 10 MPa for both CO2 and brine (NaCl), ranging from 0 to 2 molal. Our results demonstrated that threshold pressure value is consist until 0.5 molal NaCl corresponding to density of sea water, but when the salinity exceeds, its value shows a significant drop. It is further indicated that based on comparison results with a modified Young-Laplace eq. using interfacial tension and contact angle values proposed by several researchers, predicted values of threshold pressure increase linearly with increasing salinity and deviate from our experimental data. Thus, model prediction suggests that variation of threshold pressure related to salinity could not be explained fully by changes in interfacial tension and contact angle values with salinity. The present results should point out that salinity in formation water has a significant impact on sealing integrity of mudstone under conditions of geological storage of CO2.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86780", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86781" } }
{"authors":"Joseph Hendricks::University of California Santa Cruz--Marilou Sison-Mangus::University of California Santa Cruz--Sanjin Mehic::University of California Santa Cruz--Evan McMahon::University of California Santa Cruz--", "title":"B11J-0575: Investigating the presence of predatory bacteria on algal bloom samples using a T6SS gene marker.", "abstract":"Predation is considered to be a major driving force in evolution and ecology, which has been observed affecting individual organisms, communities, and entire ecosystems. The type VI secretion system (T6SS) is an intermembranal protein complex identified in certain bacteria, which appears to have evolved strictly as a mechanism of predation. The effects of bacteria on phytoplankton physiology are still understudied, however, studies have shown that the interactions between bacteria that inhabit the phycosphere of phytoplankton can possibly result in coevolution of native host and microbiota. It is unclear if bacteria can prey upon other bacteria to gain advantages during periods of high phytoplankton density. Here, we investigate the predatory interactions between bacteria and analyze environmental samples for the presence of predatory bacterial genes in an effort to understand bacteria-bacteria and phytoplankton interactions during algal blooms. DNA were extracted from bacterial samples collected weekly from size-fractionated samples using 3.0 um and 0.2 um membrane filters at the Santa Cruz wharf. PCR amplification and gel visualization for the presence of T6SS gene was carried out on bloom and non-bloom samples. Moreover, we carried out a lab- based experiment to observe bacteria-bacteria interaction that may hint for the presence of predatory behavior between bacterial taxa. We observed what appeared to be a predatory biofilm formation between certain bacterial species. These bacteria, however, did not contain the T6SS genes. On the contrary the T6SS gene was discovered in some of the bloom samples gathered from the Santa Cruz wharf. It is still unclear if the predatory mechanisms facilitate the abundance of certain groups of bacteria that contain the T6SS genes during algal blooms, but our evidence suggest that bacterial predation through T6SS mechanism is present during bloom events.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86781", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86782" } }
{"authors":"Elisabeth Vogel::University of Melbourne--", "title":"A21F-0222: An Assessment of the Quality of Crop Yield Predictions under Different Degrees of Water Limitation in European Crop Producing Countries", "abstract":"The Fifth IPCC Assessment Report on climate change shows that the frequency and/or intensity of different types of weather extreme events is likely to increase in a number of regions across the globe. The agricultural sector, which plays a crucial role for the livelihood of a large fraction of the world’s population, is particularly vulnerable to extreme events due to its dependency on climate conditions. Process-based crop models play an important role for translating climate and weather information into agricultural forecasts, both at decadal time scales as part of climate impact assessments and shorter time scales, for examples for seasonal yield predictions as part of early warning systems for harvest failures. A variety of crop models exist, with different degrees of complexity, spatial and temporal resolutions, incorporated chemical, physical and biological processes and mathematical formulations of these processes. Furthermore, crop models differ with regard to the agro-climatic zones and crop types for which they were calibrated and validated. For these reasons, crop models can vary significantly with respect to their suitability for yield forecasts under different climate conditions, geographical regions and crop types. In this study, we assess the quality of crop yield predictions of the vegetation model LPJmL for four major crops (maize, rice, wheat, soy) under a range of water limitation conditions in Europe, using a high-resolution regional climate data set (0.1 ° x 0.1 °) covering the period 1989-2008. The aim of the study is to examine the degree of uncertainty of yield predictions for different agro-climatic zones and to identify the factors that influence the goodness-of-fit of model predictions. By this, we hope to provide input into further model improvements and to provide guidance for decision-makers on the suitability of yield predictions for different climatic regions within the European continent.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86782", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86783" } }
{"authors":"Pollyanna Lind::University of Oregon--Mark Fonstad::University of Oregon--Patricia McDowell::University of Oregon--", "title":"EP53B-1008: Bedload Transport Rates and Flux Patterns in a Steep Montane Tropical River – Rio Pacuare, Costa Rica", "abstract":"Humid tropical montane rivers convey large magnitude floods that have the potential to mobilize boulder-sized bed material multiple times during a year. In the montane reaches of the Rio Pacuare active boulder deposits with surface areas of up to 300 x 75 meters influence channel form throughout this otherwise hillslope/bedrock confined river. Therefore, rate of bedload sediment flux occurring within and between river segments and reaches provides insight into the geomorphic sensitivity of the system. The study area (78 km) is divided into five river segments based on channel slope and form. The intense discharge regimes of the Rio Pacuare are off-set by the plentiful sediment inputs sourced from upstream, tributaries, and hillslopes, resulting in a system that is predominantly transport-limited. This research presents bedload sediment transport rates and annual yields calculated at seven representative field sites distributed throughout the study area. Results indicate that the D50 and D84 grain-size fractions are mobilized frequently (annual rate is dependent on timing and frequency of precipitation events). Results also indicate that connectivity between river segments ranges from moderate to high, depending most directly on channel slope. This work utilized a unique mix of traditional grain-size analysis and sediment transport models combined with repeat photogrammetric Structure from Motion (SfM) surveys done pre and post flood event to verify grain size mobilization through high-resolution, 3-D modeling.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86783", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86784" } }
{"authors":"Scott Peckham::University of Colorado--", "title":"PA53A-2230: Toward a Geoscientific Semantic Web Based on How Geoscientists Talk Across Disciplines", "abstract":"Are there terms and scientific concepts from math and science that almost all geoscientists understand? Is there a limited set of terms, patterns and language elements that geoscientists use for efficient, unambiguous communication that could be used to describe the variables that they measure, store in data sets and use as model inputs and outputs? In this talk it will be argued that the answer to both questions is ` yes`  by drawing attention to many such patterns and then showing how they have been used to create a rich set of naming conventions for variables called the CSDMS Standard Names. Variables, which store numerical quantities associated with specific objects, are the fundamental currency of science. They are the items that are measured and saved in data sets, which may then be read into models. They are the inputs and outputs of models and the items exchanged between coupled models. They also star in the equations that summarize our scientific knowledge. Carefully constructed, unambiguous and unique labels for commonly used variables therefore provide an attractive mechanism for automatic semantic mediation when variables are to be shared between heterogeous resources. They provide a means to automatically check for semantic equivalence so that variables can be safely shared in resource compositions. A good set of standardized variable names can serve as the hub in a hub-and-spoke solution to semantic mediation, where the ` internal vocabularies`  of geoscience resources (i.e. data sets and models) are mapped to and from the hub to facilitate interoperability and data sharing. When built from patterns and terms that most geoscientists are already familiar with, these standardized variable names are then ` readable`  by both humans and machines. Despite the importance of variables in scientific work, most of the ontological work in the geosciences is focused at a higher level that supports finding resources (e.g data sets) but not on describing the contents of those resources. The CSDMS Standard Names have matured continuously since they were first introduced over three years ago. Many recent extensions and applications of them (e.g. different science domains, different projects, new rules, ontological work) as well as their compatibility with the International System of Quantities (ISO 80000) will be discussed.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86784", "section":"Public Affairs"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86785" } }
{"authors":"Anna Malanushenko::High Altitude Observatory--", "title":"SH31B-2423: Coronal Heating: Testing Models of Coronal Heating by Forward-Modeling the AIA Emission of the Ansample of Coronal Loops", "abstract":"We present a systemic exploration of the properties of coronal heating, by forward-modeling the emission of the ensemble of 1D quasi-steady loops. This approximations were used in many theoretical models of the coronal heating. The latter is described in many such models in the form of power laws, relating heat flux through the photosphere or volumetric heating to the strength of the magnetic field and length of a given field line. We perform a large search in the parameter space of these power laws, amongst other variables, and compare the resulting emission of the active region to that observed by AIA. We use a recently developed magnetic field model which uses shapes of coronal loops to guide the magnetic model; the result closely resembles observed structures by design. We take advantage of this, by comparing, in individual sub-regions of the active region, the emission of the active region and its synthetic model. This study allows us to rule out many theoretical models and formulate predictions for the heating models to come.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86785", "section":"Solar and Heliospheric Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86786" } }
{"authors":"Faron Anslow::University of Victoria--", "title":"A51K-0230: Retrieval of wintertime monthly climatological precipitation from snow survey data", "abstract":"For the purposes of developing high resolution maps of monthly climate normals for precipitation in British Columbia, the data-sparse high elevation regions present a substantial problem. These locations suffer from a sparse observational network to begin with and the measurements sites that do exist are often unable to accurately record solid precipitation amounts owing to undercatch associated with blowing snow, instrument capping, instrument failure, bridging over snow pillows or grossly inadequate instrumentation such as tipping buckets. British Columbia's River Forecast centre operates a fairly extensive network of snow survey sites which are accessed on a monthly basis beginning as early as January in a given year and running through June at sites where snow is present. These measurements have long temporal histories which enables their use as proxies for monthly precipitation during the months when instrument measurement is most difficult. These are proxy indicators because SWE on the ground is a product of accumulated snow minus evaporation and any meltwater that has percolated through the snowpack. We present a simple method for retrieving monthly climatological precipitation from snow survey sites and demonstrate the effects of including the data in construction of Parameter Regression on Independent Slopes Model precipitation climatology maps.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86786", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86787" } }
{"authors":"Xiaotong Peng::Sanya Institute of Deep-Sea Science and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences--Zixiao Guo::Sanya Institute of Deep-sea Science and Engineering--Christopher House::Pennsylvania State University--Shun Chen::Sanya Institute of Deep-sea Science and Engineering--Kaiwen Ta::Sanya Institute of Deep-Sea Science and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences--", "title":"B21A-0406: SIMS and NanoSIMS analyses of Mesoproterozoic individual microfossils indicating continuous oxygen-producing photosynthesis in Proterozoic Ocean", "abstract":"Well-preserved microfossils in the stromatolites from the Gaoyuzhuang Formation (~1500Ma), which is younger than the Gunflint Formation (~1880Ma) and older than the Bitter Springs Formation (~850Ma), may play key roles in systematizing information about the evolution of early life and environmental changes in the Proterozoic Ocean. Here, a combination of light microscopy (LM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), focused ion beam (FIB), nano-scale secondary ion mass spectrometry (NanoSIMS) and secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) were employed to characterize the morphology, elemental distributions and carbon isotope values of individual microfossils in the stromatolites from the Gaoyuahzuang Formation. Light microscopy analyses show that abundant filamentous and coccoid microfossils are exceptionally well preserved in chert. NanoSIMS analyses show that metabolically important elements such as 12C−, 13C−, 12C14N−, 32S−, and 34S− are concentrated in these microfossils and that the variations in the concentrations of these elements are similar, establishing the elemental distributions in incontestably biogenic microstructures. Carbon isotope (δ13C) values of individual microfossils range from -32.2‰ ± 0.9‰ to -23.3‰ ± 1.0‰ (weighted mean= -28.9‰ ± 0.1‰), consistent with carbon fixation via the Calvin cycle. The elevated δ13C values of the microfossils from Early-, Meso- to Late Proterozoic Era, possibly indicate decreasing CO2 and increasing O2 concentrations in the Proterozoic atmosphere. Our results, for the first time, provided the element distributions and cell specific carbon isotope values on convincing Mesoproterozoic cyanobacterial fossils, supporting continuous oxygen-producing photosynthesis in the Proterozoic Ocean.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86787", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86789" } }
{"authors":"Zhou Lin::Zhejiang University--", "title":"T33A-2939: Geomorphic evolution processes of the relict landscape and deep-incised valleys along the Red River fault zone, Yunnan Province, China", "abstract":"Based on DEM analysis and field observations, the study reveals the form of topographic characteristics of the Red River region, Yunnan Province, China, which is in response to southeastward growth of the Tibetan Plateau. Knickpoints in the valleys along the Red River fault are objectively extracted, and an upper low-relief segment separated by the knickpoints is identified, and is corresponding to the relict landscape. Continuous Davisian landform-evolution processes and propagation of the topographic steady state along the fault demonstrate that the relict landscape should originally be a continuous surface. Moreover, as the distribution pattern of the knickpoints varies along the fault from northwest to southeast, the pattern is further examined to distinguish the climatic and tectonic influences. The study provides morpholoical evidences for the episodic Plateau uplift, and also help to understand the processes of the southeastward extension of the Plateau.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86789", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86790" } }
{"authors":"Ian Kane::Statoil Norway Fornebu--Anna Pontén::Statoil--David Hodgson::University of Leeds--Brita Vangdal::Statoil--", "title":"EP41D-08: Reconstructing Deep-Marine Sediment Gravity Flow Dynamics from Ancient Rocks: an Example from Skoorsteenberg Fm. Tanqua Karoo", "abstract":"The processes which create deep-marine lobes are challenging to study, owing to the depth of the lobes beneath the sea surface and the destructive nature of the sediment gravity flows which transport the sediment that builds them. One approach is to reconstruct paleohydraulics using detailed outcrop observations which can be used to build a theoretical framework for flow behavior. The Skoorsteenberg Fm., Tanqua Karoo, offers an excellent opportunity to study fine-grained deep-marine lobes in near continuous quasi-3D exposure. The spatial and stratigraphic distribution of the various facies of Fan 3 (one of the Skoorsteenberg Fm. lobe complexes) are presented. The turbidites which dominate the proximal and medial lobe areas, pass down-dip into very muddy sandstones which are here attributed to a type of transitional flow state. The model developed here suggests that turbidity currents exiting channels were large and turbulent enough to erode and entrain their substrate, increasing their concentration and clay content. As the flows decelerated they became increasingly stratified, characterised by an increasing bulk Richardson (Ri). Sand and silt particles settled together with flocculated clay, forming a cohesive, low yield-strength layer. This layer flowed in a laminar manner but settling of sand grains continued due to the low yield strength. The rising yield strength of the lower layer progressively inhibited the efficiency of vertical mixing, characterised by an increasing flux Richardson number, which, when it exceeded a critical value , led to a catastrophic collapse of the turbulent energy field and en-masse transformation of the upper part of the flow, ultimately resulting in a highly argillaceous sandstone (debrite) division. This transformation was possible due to the narrow grain size range, dominantly silt-vf sand with abundant flocculated clay, which behaved as a single phase. This model of flow evolution accounts for the presence of such beds without invoking external controls or large-scale flow partitioning, and also explains the abrupt pinchout of all divisions of these sandstones following catastrophic loss of turbulence.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86790", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86791" } }
{"authors":"Hamed Fazli Khani::University of Bergen--Haakon Fossen::University of Bergen--Robert Gawthorpe::University of Bergen--Jan Inge Faleide::University of Oslo--Rebecca Bell::Imperial College London--Atle Rotevatn::University of Bergen--Christopher Jackson::Imperial College London--", "title":"T51E-2950: What role does structural inheritance play in controlling the geometry of rifted basins during multiple phases of extension? A case study from the Northern North Sea", "abstract":"In multiphase rift systems pre-existing crustal structures, which typically lie within crystalline basement, may influence the nucleation, growth and linkage of overlying normal faults. However, our understanding of the physical and kinematic linkage between basement and cover structures is limited, since deep structures are commonly poorly imaged in seismic reflection data. The North Sea Rift is an ideal natural laboratory to study the role of structural inheritance on the geometry of rifts, having undergone multiple phases of contractional (Ordovician-Devonian) and extensional (Devonian, Permian-Triassic and Middle Jurassic-Early Cretaceous) deformation. In this study we constrain the influence of pre-existing crustal structures on the evolution of Permian-Triassic and Middle Jurassic-to-Early Cretaceous normal fault systems. To achieve this we utilize 2D and 3D seismic reflection and borehole data from the Northern North Sea, covering the eastern margin of North Viking Graben. We show that pre-existing basement structures control the first-order rift geometry, including the location and the strike of the main Permian-Triassic bounding faults and intrabasement highs. In detail, however, the link is more complex, with some Permian-Triassic rift-related normal faults seemingly unrelated in terms of location or strike to intrabasement structures. Similar complexity is observed between Permian-Triassic and Middle Jurassic-to-Early Cretaceous rift related faults. We show that the importance of pre-existing structures on rift geometry decreases over time, with these structures having a major influence on the geometry of Permian-Triassic rift basin, but a more subdued influence on the Middle Jurassic-to-Early Cretaceous rift.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86791", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86792" } }
{"authors":"Manish Sharma::Flat No D17 Harmukh appartment--Ramesh Singh::Chapman University--Rajesh Kumar::Sharda University--", "title":"A21A-0101: INFLUENCE OF DELHI POLLUTION ON AEROSOL PROPERTIES OVER GREATER NOIDA", "abstract":"Influence of Delhi Pollution on Aerosol Properties over Greater Noida Manish Sharma1, Ramesh P. Singh2 and Rajesh Kumar3  1Research and Technology Development Centre, Sharda University, Greater Noida, India. 2School of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Schmid College of Science, Chapman University, Orange 92866, USA 3School of Basic Sciences and Research, Sharda University, Greater Noida, India. Delhi capital of India is highly polluted during winter and summer seasons. Due to dominant westerly winds the air mass influence its neighboring city Greater Noida which is located 60 km south east of Delhi. Detailed analysis of multi satellite data and ground observations have been carried out during 2001-2015. The ground observation and satellite data show dynamic aerosol optical parameters over Greater Noida. During winter and summer seasons, dominant westerly wind outflow pollutants of Delhi that mix with the local anthropogenic emissions of Greater Noida influencing aerosol properties at different pressure levels. The characteristics of trace gases and aerosol parameters over Delhi and Greater Noida will be presented. The air quality is severely affected from the outflow of pollutants from Delhi which is threat to people living in the area. Due to dominant winds the air mass further transported towards eastern parts of Indo-Gangetic plains affecting weather conditions of the major cities.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86792", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86793" } }
{"authors":"Kevin Hodges::University of Reading--Matt Hawcroft::University of Exeter--Len Shaffrey::University of Reading--Helen Dacre::University of Reading--Richard Forbes::European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts--Thorwald Stein::University of Reading--", "title":"A43I-04: Evaluating Precipitation, Latent Heat Release and Potential Vorticity in Extratropical Cyclones in a High Resolution Climate Model using Reanalysis and Remote Sensing Data", "abstract":"Climate models must be capable of adequately simulating the processes that drive extratropical cyclones if they are to realistically represent their evolution and propagation. One such process which models need to capture is the magnitude and location of latent heat release within cyclones. Precipitation is closely related to column integrated latent heating, but both the magnitude and the (horizontal and vertical) location of the latent heat release in the context of the relative vorticity structure in a cyclone is important as the potential vorticity generation is determined by both of these factors. Here, an evaluation of precipitation and latent heat release in a climate model (HiGEM) is presented. The model is evaluated against a range of remote sensing data and global reanalyses (ERA-Interim) using an innovative storm compositing technique. Many studies compare models to reanalysis, but at the scale of individual weather systems, the latent heat release in global reanalyses may not be strongly constrained by the observations. Remote sensing data that measures processes associated with latent heat release is therefore employed to extend this work. Forward modelled radiances from the model and reanalysis are created using an offline simulator (COSP: CFMIP Offline Simulator Package) to provide fields that can be directly compared to remote sensing data from ISCCP (International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project) and CloudSat, in addition to direct comparison of the model and reanalysis data to the GPCP (Global Precipitation Climatology Project) dataset. The potential vorticity structure and evolution of composite extratropical cyclones is then compared in HiGEM and ERA-Interim, with starkly divergent results, which are related to differences in latent heating.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86793", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86794" } }
{"authors":"Laurens Bouwer::Deltares--Dirk Eilander::Deltares--Jenifer Barnes::South Florida Water Management--Marjolein Mens::Deltares--Jayantha Obeysekera::South Florida Water Management--", "title":"H51A-1356: System robustness analysis for drought risk management in South Florida", "abstract":"Drought is a frequently returning natural hazard in Florida, with at least one severe drought to be expected every decade. These droughts have had many impacts such as loss of agricultural products, inadequate public water supply and salt water intrusion into freshwater aquifers. Furthermore, climate change projections for South Florida suggest that dry spells are likely to be more frequent and prolonged, with negative impacts on water supply management for all users. In this study a System Robustness Analysis was conducted in order to analyse the effectiveness of strategies to limit the socio-economic impact of droughts under climate change. System Robustness Analysis (SRA) aims to support decision making by quantifying how well a system, with and without additional measures, can remain functioning under a range of external disturbances. Two system characteristics add up to system robustness: Resistance is the ability to withstand disturbances without responding (zero impact), and resilience is the ability to recover from the response to a disturbance. SRA can help to provide insight into the sensitivity of a system to changing magnitudes of extreme weather events. A regional-scale hydrologic and water management model is used to simulate the effect of changing precipitation and evaporation forcing on agricultural and urban water supply and demand in South Florida. The complex water management operational rules including water use restrictions are simulated in the model. Based on model runs with a various climate scenarios, drought events with a wide range of severity are identified and for each event the socio-economic impacts are determined. Here, a drought is defined as a reduced streamflow in the upstream Kissimmee basin, which contributes most to Lake Okeechobee, the major surface water storage in the system. The drought severity is characterized by the maximum drought deficit volume. Drought impacts are analyzed for several users in Miami Dade County. From the relation between drought severity and drought impact the resistance and resilience of the system for hydrological droughts are found. This relation is investigated for an array of adaptation measures and strategies in order to find strategies that will effectively increase the system’s ability to deal with future drought events.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86794", "section":"Hydrology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86795" } }
{"authors":"Robert van der Hilst::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--Haijiang Zhang::University of Science and Technology of China--Monica Maceira::Los Alamos National Laboratory--Fei Chen::University of Science and Technology of China--Weisen Shen::University of Colorado at Boulder--Hongjian Fang::University of Science and Technology of China--Huajian Yao::USTC University of Science and Technology of China--", "title":"T11F-03: Three-Dimensional Vp and Vs Models of Continental China From Joint Inversion of Body Wave, Surface Wave, and Gravity Data", "abstract":"<span` ><span` >To improve our understanding of the complex geological structure of continental China we need accurate depictions of the 3D structure of the crust and lithospheric mantle. Taking advantage of the increasingly dense seismograph coverage in continental China, several Vp and Vs models at various scales and resolutions have been obtained over the past decades. Tomographic models based either on body wave travel times or surface waves differ, however, in important aspects, especially for the structure beneath the Tibetan Plateau. <span` >Internally consistent Vp and Vs models are needed to resolve these differences. <span` >Body wave travel time tomography and surface wave tomography each have strengths and weaknesses. Travel time tomography can yield higher resolution in regions of dense path coverage, and it generally has excellent lateral resolution beneath regions of high seismic activity or dense station distribution. In many other regions, however, the shallow subsurface cannot be resolved adequately by direct P or S travel times. In contrast, surface wave data (from earthquakes or ambient noise) generally yields better radial resolution and has better potential for resolving shallow mantle structure beneath regions that are aseismic or which are void of seismograph stations. Gravity measurements can provide constraints on spatial variations in (mass) density, but like other potential field methods interpretation of gravity anomalies is plagued by substantial ambiguity. Indeed, weak and broad structures in the shallow subsurface can produce the same gravity signal (at the surface) as a small, strong density anomaly at a larger depth. <span` > <span` >To benefit from the complementary sampling of the different data, we have developed a joint inversion scheme that uses body wave travel times, surface wave dispersion, and satellite gravity data to invert for spatial variations in Vp, Vs, and mass density (with the seismic and gravity data linked through an empirical relationship between wavespeed and density). We have tested our joint inversion at various scales, and we will present internally consistent Vp and Vs models and their implications for our understanding of the complex structure of continental China and the Tibetan Plateau. ", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86795", "section":"Tectonophysics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86798" } }
{"authors":"Odutayo Rufai::Council for Scientific and Industrial Research--", "title":"Low frequency electrostatic structures in magnetized auroral plasmas with superthermal hot electrons.", "abstract":"Finite amplitude ion-acoustic waves in a magnetized auroral plasma consisting of cold ions fluid, Maxwellian ions and superthermal hot electrons (kappa distributed) are studied. Using the Sagdeev pseudo-potential techique, the effect of the kappa distributed hot electron species on obliquely propagating nonlinear structures are investigated both numerically and numerically. The present investigation shows good agreement with spacecraft obsevations in the auroral region of the Magnetisphere.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86798", "section":""} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86799" } }
{"authors":"Gareth Thomas::Rutherford Appleton Laboratory--", "title":"GC31D-0541: Towards Consistent Aerosol and Cloud Climate Data Records from the Along Track Scanning Radiometer instruments", "abstract":"The ESA Climate Change Initiative (CCI) programme has provided a mechanism for the production of new long-term data records of essential climate variables (ECVs) defined by WMO Global Climate Observing System (GCOS). These include consistent cloud (from the MODIS, AVHRR, ATSR-2 and AATSR instruments) and aerosol (from ATSR-2 and AATSR) products produced using the Optimal Retrieval of Aerosol and Cloud (ORAC) scheme. This talk will present an overview of the newly produced ORAC cloud and aerosol datasets, their evaluation and a joint aerosol-cloud product produced for the 1995-2012 ATSR-2-AATSR data record.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86799", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86800" } }
{"authors":"William Nardin::Boston University--Sergio Fagherazzi::Boston University--", "title":"EP23B-0960: Chenier plain development: feedbacks between waves, mud and sand", "abstract":"Cheniers are sandy ridges parallel to the coast established by high energy waves. Here we discuss Chenier plains ontogeny through dimensional analysis and numerical results from the morphodynamic model Delft3D-SWAN. Our results show that wave energy and shelf slope play an important role in the formation of Chenier plains. In our numerical experiments waves affect Chenier plain development in three ways: by winnowing sediment from the mudflat, by eroding mud and accumulating sand over the beach during extreme wave events. We further show that different sediment characteristics and wave climates can lead to three alternative coastal landscapes: strand plains, mudflats, or the more complex Chenier plains. Low inner-shelf slopes are the most favorable for strand plain and Chenier plain formation, while high slopes decrease the likelihood of mudflat development and preservation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86800", "section":"Earth and Planetary Surface Processes"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86801" } }
{"authors":"David Awolala::West African Science Service Center for Climate Change and Adapted Land Use (WASCAL)--", "title":"GC43B-1192: Trends and Bioclimatic Assessment of Extreme Indices: Emerging Insights for Rainfall Derivative Crop Microinsurance in Central-West Nigeria", "abstract":"Scientific predictions have forecasted increasing economic losses by which farming households will be forced to consider new adaptation pathways to close the food gap and be income secure. Pro-poor adaptation planning decisions therefore must rely on location-specific details from systematic assessment of extreme climate indices to provide template for most suitable financial adaptation instruments. This paper examined critical loss point to water stress in maize production and risk-averse behaviour to extreme local climate in Central West Nigeria. Trends of extreme indices and bio-climatic assessment based on RClimDex for numerical weather predictions were carried out using a 3-decade time series daily observational climate data of the sub-humid region. The study reveals that the flowering and seed formation stage was identified as the most critical loss point when seed formation is a function of per unit soil water available for uptake. The sub-humid has a bi-modal rainfall pattern but faces longer dry spell with a fast disappearing mild climate measured by budyko evaporation of 80.1%. Radiation index of dryness of 1.394 confirms the region is rapidly becoming drier at an evaporation rate of 949 mm/year and rainfall deficit of 366 mm/year. Net primary production from rainfall is fast declining by 1634 g(DM)/m2/year. These conditions influenced by monthly rainfall uncertainties are associated with losses of standing crops because farmers are uncertain of rainfall probability distribution especially during most important vegetative stage. In a simulated warmer climate, an absolute dryness of months was observed compared with 4 dry months in a normal climate which explains triggers of food deficits and income losses. Positive coefficients of tropical nights (TR20), warm nights (TN90P) and warm days (TX90P), and the negative coefficient of cold days (TX10P) with time are significant at P<0.05. The increasing gradient of warm spell indicator (WSDI), the decreasing gradients of cold nights (TN10P) and cold days (TX10P) are added evidence of aridity arising from increasing rainfall deficits. This paper recommends that the region needs rainfall-based index microinsurance adaptation financial instruments capable of sharing covariate shocks with farmers within an incentive-based risk sharing framework.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86801", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86805" } }
{"authors":"Max Holloway::NERC British Antarctic Survey University of Bristol--", "title":"PP43C-2303: Modelling the Isotopic Response to West Antarctic Ice Sheet Collapse and Sea Ice Retreat During the Last Interglacial ", "abstract":"Ice sheet changes can exert major control over spatial water isotope variations in Antarctic surface snow. Consequently a significant mass loss or gain of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) would be expected to cause changes in the water isotope record across Antarctic ice core sites. Analysis of sea level indicators for the last interglacial (LIG; 130,000 to 115,000 years ago) suggest a global sea level peak 6 to 9 m higher than present. Recent NEEM Greenland ice core results imply that Greenland likely provided a modest 2m contribution towards this global sea level rise. This implies that a WAIS contribution is necessary to explain the LIG sea level maxima. In addition, Antarctic ice core records suggest that Antarctic air temperatures during the LIG were up to 6 °C warmer than present. Climate models have been unable to recreate such warmth when only orbital and greenhouse gas forcing are considered. Thus changes to the Antarctic ice sheet and ocean circulation may be required to reconcile model simulations with ice core data. Here we model the isotopic response to differing WAIS deglaciation scenarios, freshwater hosing, and sea ice configurations using a fully coupled General Circulation Model (GCM) to help interpret Antarctic ice core records over the LIG.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86805", "section":"Paleoceanography and Paleoclimatology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86808" } }
{"authors":"Carlos Ochoa::Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico--Arturo Quintanar::Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico--David Adams::UNAM National Autonomous University of Mexico--Benjamin Martinez-lopez::Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico--", "title":"A33J-0318: Simulation of the Diurnal Cycle of Integrated Precipitable Water in the North American Monsoon Region", "abstract":"Organized deep convection over the North American monsoon region (NAM) is a salient climatic feature that has been the subject of several experimental campaigns and modeling efforts. Recently, however, in Mexico and the Caribbean, there has been mounting interest towards implementing low-cost, low-maintenance GPS-meteorological networks (TLALOCNet and COCOnet) that provide near real-time Integrated Precipitable Water data (IPW) into the assimilation cycle of regional models. A wealth of interesting new observational results concerning the link between the diurnal cycle of deep convection and the processes that could alter it at the surface and aloft has open up opportunities of model verification and improvements to the physics that are specific to subtropical deep convection. In this work, the diurnal cycle of IPW is studied using observational data collected during the North American Monsoon GPS Transect Experiment 2013 experiment and numerical simulations with the Weather Research and Forecasting model (WRF). WRF was run in climate mode to generate a simulation for the entire experiment using ECMWF ERA-Interim analysis data for initial and boundary conditions and spectral nudging. We classified the days during the experiment, according to type of mesoscale phenomena present each day and averaged days with same weather types in both data sets (observed and simulated). Preliminary results show that the simulated diurnal cycle of IPW is very sensitive to Land Use/Land Cover data and to initial and the boundary conditions. Preliminary results show that the simulated amplitude and phase of the diurnal cycle of IPW is well represented only when a more up-to-date LULC is used (MODIS v.s. 99 USGS LULC) and the Thompson mycrophysics scheme is used. In agreement with the previous results, modeled precipitation time series agree better with observed GPS-meterological station reports during the NAM 2013 experiment.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86808", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86811" } }
{"authors":"Scott Denning::Colorado State University--Melissa Burt::Colorado State University--Brian Jones::Colorado State University--", "title":"ED13B-0889: Learning from each other: results of a decade of close collaboration between scientists and educators at CMMAP", "abstract":"Since 2006, the Center for Multiscale Modeling of Atmospheric Processes (CMMAP) has sponsored a fertile collaboration among researchers in many fields, graduate and undergraduate student, K-12 teachers, science outreach professionals, and evaluators. This collaboration included groundbreaking work in climate modeling, ecology, political science, sociology, psychology, and English. At the undergraduate level, we engaged more than 80 faculty in 26 Departments at a major public university who now teach one another’s content in dozens of classes. Hundreds of English Composition students learned about climate change while developing basic writing skills. We also worked very closely with public schools to develop and test curriculum enhancement kits for teaching standards-aligned climate science in K-12 classrooms and built a successful series of Professional Development workshops for teachers at three different grade levels. Nearly 200,000 students participated in these programs in public schools and millions of individuals around the world used our web-based tools. The success of this collaborative program is apparent in traditional metrics and assessments of content knowledge. Equally important, the sustained interaction with education professionals had a substantial impact on the climate scientists and faculty involved in the program, and on our graduate students. We outline some of the key elements that made CMMAP’s program successful, and offer suggestions for other institutions seeking to enhance climate literacy.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86811", "section":"Education"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86814" } }
{"authors":"Peter Schlosser::Columbia University--Ronny Friedrich::Lamont -Doherty Earth Observatory--Robert Newton::Columbia University of New York--Martin Stute::Barnard College--L Plummer::USGS--", "title":"B54A-07: Triritum/He-3 dating of groundwater in the United States: general features and specific applications", "abstract":"Tritium/He-3 dating is widely used to study flow patterns in groundwater and time scales on which young groundwater is recharged. We have determined tritium/He-3 ages from a large set of groundwater samples collected at various sites in the United States. Here we present general features of the geographical distribution of tritium and He isotopes found in these samples including terrigenic helium sources, latitudinal gradients in tritium, and ranges of He isotopes, tritium, and the tritium/He-3 age. We also discuss case studies that demonstrate the application of the tritium/He-3 dating method in simple and more complex aquifers systems.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86814", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86818" } }
{"authors":"Yam Dhital::Kathmandu University IGSNRR Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research, CAS--Qiuhong Tang::IGSNRR Institute of Geographic Sciences and Natural Resources Research, CAS--", "title":"NH33B-1920: Ecological applications for flood hazard minimization in the Siwaliks region of Nepal", "abstract":"Water-induced disaster problems including soil erosion, debris flow, landslides and flooding are common due to the unstable landscape of Siwaliks region of Nepal. Ecological applications especially focused on soil bioengineering techniques have been used in Nepal for nearly four decades to deal with erosion problems on slopes, in high way construction and riverbank stabilization. In this study, both vegetative check dams and wire net check dams along with vegetation were used for flood hazard minimization. After three growing seasons, the banks of the ephemeral stream were almost fully stabilized. Vegetation based solutions are found to be more effective than the mechanical methods of stream bank stabilization. Bamboo combinations for check dam construction and planting of bamboo behind check dam are both very useful for stream bank stabilization. Vegetation application on flood damaged bare ground was also found to be very successful. Furthermore, some plants species showed almost equal growth performances on both flood-affected and unaffected bare ground. However, more scientific implementation of ecological applications for flood hazard minimization in those affected areas is essential in future.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86818", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86819" } }
{"authors":"Youngjoo Kwak::International Centre for Water Hazard And Risk Management (ICHARM-UNESCO)--Jonggeol PARK::Tokyo University of Information Science--Yoichi Iwami::International Centre for Water Hazard And Risk Management (ICHARM-UNESCO)--", "title":"NH51E-1955: Large-scale Flood Monitoring: Where is the most exposed to large flood in Asia?", "abstract":"Flood mapping and monitoring (particularly flood areas, locations, and durations) are an imperative process and are the fundamental part of risk management as well as emergency response. We have found that Bangladesh is the highest risk country among 14 Asian developing countries from flood risk assessment under climate change scenarios because of its largest vulnerable population to cyclic 50-year flood events. This study shows a methodological possibility to be used as a standard approach for continental-scale flood hazard and risk assessment with the use of multi-temporal Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrometer (MODIS), a big contributor to progress in real-time hazard mapping. The purpose of this study is to detect flood inundation areas considering the flood propagation even with limitations of optical and multispectral images. We improved a water detection algorithm to achieve a better discrimination capacity to discern flood areas by using amodified land surface water index (MLSWI), and estimated flood extent areas, coupled with the water level and an optimal threshold ofMLSWI based on the spectral characteristics. In Bangladesh, the FFWC warns people that floods occur when the water level exceeds the danger level. We clearly confirmed that the flood propagation was in good agreement with the timing of the water level exceeding the water danger level in the case of the cyclic 10-year flood event. The flooding was also found to be proportional to theflood extent (areas) and duration. The results showed the novel approach’s capability of providing instant,comprehensive nationwide flood mapping over the entire Bangladesh by using multi-temporal MODIS data. The ambiguities of rapid flood mapping from satellite-derived products were verified in the Brahmaputra River by using high-resolution images (ALOS AVNIR2, spatial resolution 10m), ground truth and field survey data.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86819", "section":"Natural Hazards"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86820" } }
{"authors":"William Symes::Rice Univ--", "title":"S13C-02: Globalizing convergence of full waveform inversion via extended modeling", "abstract":"Full waveform inversion is by now well-established as a useful geoimaging tool, capable in some instances of producing subsurface structural information of high resolution and accuracy. Several challenges to its widespread use remain, however, including the expense of simulation for accurate seismic physics, and provision of uncertainty quantification allowing for the strongly nonlinear relation between model and data. Especially problematic is the requirement that initial model estimates be relatively accurate, in a kinematic sense at least, predicting travel times of significant data components to within a half-wavelength. In the context of exploration seismic imaging of the Earth's upper crust, this requirement is sometimes difficult or impossible to satisfy. Recent modifications to full waveform inversion introduce additional model parameters, thus reducing the ` stiffness`  of the fit criterion and enabling convergence to useful model estimates from less accurate initial models than are required for the basic algorithm. I will review some of these extended modeling adaptations of full waveform inversion, and explain via some simple examples why one might expect them to work. In fact, several extended modeling variants are closely related to travel time data fitting, and inherit its larger domain of convergence.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86820", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86822" } }
{"authors":"Claire White::Princeton University--Anna Blyth::Princeton University--George Scherer::Princeton University--Antoine Morandeau::Princeton University--", "title":"MR52A-05: Investigating permeability and carbonation behavior of sustainable cements", "abstract":"The durability of new sustainable cementitious materials is intimately linked with the ability for these materials to prevent the ingress of aggressive ions through their percolated pore networks. However, it is also important to be able to control and limit the detrimental chemical degradation mechanisms that occur to the cement binder once the ions have diffused through the pore network. Here, alkali-activated materials will be discussed, and recent research on measuring the permeability of this class of cements using the beam-bending method will be presented. It will be shown that the permeability can be controlled by tailoring the activator chemistry, and that the addition of free silica in the activator has a strong (favorable) influence on the resulting percolated pore network. Carbonation is one type of chemical degradation process that is known to severely shorten the service life of concrete, especially in environments containing elevated CO­2 levels. However, the exact atomic structural changes that occur to the main binder phase (calcium-silicate-hydrate gel) during carbonation remain largely unknown. Here, X-ray pair distribution function analysis is used to elucidate the local atomic structural changes that occur during carbonation of calcium-silicate-hydrate gel and calcium-aluminosilicate-hydrate gel (alkali-activated slag binder), where distinct differences in the extent of gel decalcification are measured according to the chemistry of the starting precursor material. The results will be discussed in the context of limiting the extent of carbonation in cementitious materials, with potential applications of alkali-activated materials in geological storage of CO2 due to their increased resistance to carbonation.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86822", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86823" } }
{"authors":"Mak Saito::Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution--Alexander Dorsk::Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution--Anton Post::University of Rhode Island--Matthew McIlvin::Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution--Dawn Moran::Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution--Michael Rappe::University of Hawaii at Manoa--Giacomo DiTullio::College of Charleston--", "title":"B13K-06: Needles in the blue Sea: Sub-species specificity by targeted metaproteomics of the vast oceanic microbial metaproteome", "abstract":"Targeted metaproteomics is the application of mass spectrometry-based quantitative protein measurements to natural microbial populations. It has significant potential for providing novel biogeochemical insights, for example by measurement of specific biomarkers indicative of nutrient stress, as well as direct measurements of enzymes that can be used to provide estimates of potential reaction rates. High microbial diversity presents unique challenges to this method. We examined the feasibility of a targeted metaproteomics workflow in Pacific Ocean environments for two cyanobacterial nitrogen regulatory proteins, NtcA and P-II. Genomic analyses using new METATRYP software found the number of shared (redundant) tryptic peptides between different marine bacteria species to typically being 1% or less. Closely related cyanobacteria Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus shared an average of 4.8+1.9% of their tryptic peptides, while shared intraspecies peptides were higher, with 13+15% shared peptides. Measurements of an NtcA peptide in the Pacific Ocean was found to target multiple cyanobacteria species, whereas a P-II peptide showed sub-species specificity to the high-light Prochlorococcus ecotype. Distributions of NtcA and P-II in the Central Pacific Ocean were similar except at the Equator likely due to differential nitrogen stress responses between Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus. The number of unique tryptic peptides coded for within three combined oceanic microbial metagenomes was estimated to be ~4e7, 1000-fold larger an individual microbial proteome and 27-fold larger than the human proteome, yet still 20 orders of magnitude lower than the peptide diversity possible in all protein space, implying that peptide mapping algorithms should be able to withstand the added level of complexity in metaproteomic samples. These oceanic quantitative protein distributions in the oceans demonstrate sub-species resolution is achievable combining in silico and empirical approaches.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86823", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86829" } }
{"authors":"Tami Bond::Univ Illinois--", "title":"A31G-01: Those Pesky Humans: Emissions and the Future of AnthroGeoscience", "abstract":"Despite the “Geophysical” word in our society’s name, a large fraction of our work is devoted to characterizing how humans influence the Earth system: the discipline of anthrogeoscience.When I joined AGU in 1997, emissions for atmospheric models were treated as ` just a flux.`  Since then, emission inventories have become recognized as core intermediaries to describe how humans, and their use of Earth’s resources, connect with Earth’s atmosphere. What we know and don’t know about emissions often reflects what we know and don’t know about people. Emissions and atmospheric pollution become routinely observable and controllable when a society reaches a certain level of technical expertise. The least well-understood emissions of air pollutants occur before this point in societal development, or remain after controls are implemented. Yet the humans who live with these emissions may have enormous health impacts and other elevated risks. The future emission trajectories that we can choose are constrained by human capacity, capital stock, physical infrastructure, and ultimately, political will. Many have hoped to follow a low-impact trajectory, but have yet to understand and commit to the physical and societal changes required. Understanding and choosing the future of the atmosphere will require close-coupled projections of the three-way connection between humans, the built environment, and the Earth system. Responsible stewardship will require us to integrate disciplines ranging from engineering and planning to human behavior and governance. The American Geophysical Union is key to the future of anthrogeoscience. Looking beyond its halls is imperative, as well.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86829", "section":"Atmospheric Sciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86831" } }
{"authors":"Frances Moore::University of California Berkeley--Marshall Burke::Stanford University--", "title":"GC53G-1292: Estimating the Importance of Private Adaptation to Climate Change in Agriculture: A Review of Empirical Methods", "abstract":"A wide range of studies using a variety of methods strongly suggest that climate change will have a negative impact on agricultural production in many areas. Farmers though should be able to learn about a changing climate and to adjust what they grow and how they grow it in order to reduce these negative impacts. However, it remains unclear how effective these private (autonomous) adaptations will be, or how quickly they will be adopted. Constraining the uncertainty on this adaptation is important for understanding the impacts of climate change on agriculture. Here we review a number of empirical methods that have been proposed for understanding the rate and effectiveness of private adaptation to climate change. We compare these methods using data on agricultural yields in the United States and western Europe.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86831", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86857" } }
{"authors":"Victoria Orphan::California Institute of Technology--Connor Skennerton::California Institute of Technology--Grayson Chadwick::California Institute of Technology--Fauzi Haroon::University of Queensland--Gene Tyson::University of Queensland--Andy Leu::University of Queensland--Roland Hatzenpichler::California Institute of Technology--Tanja Woyke::Joint Genome Institute--Rex Malmstrom::Joint Genome Institute--Hang Yu::California Institute of Technology--Silvan Scheller::California Institute of Technology--", "title":"B13K-02: Genomic insights into the metabolic potential and interactions between marine methanotrophic ANME archaea and associated bacteria", "abstract":"Cooperative metabolic interactions between multiple groups of methanotrophic ‘ANME’ archaea and sulfate-reducing bacteria represent the primary sink for methane within continental margin sediments. These syntrophic associations are frequently observed as structured multi-celled consortia in methane seeps, often comprising a substantial proportion of the microbial biomass within near seafloor seep sediments. Since their discovery nearly 15 years ago, a number of distinct ANME groups and multiple sulfate-reducing bacterial partners have been described from seep environments worldwide. Attempts to reconstruct the genomes of some ANME organisms have been reported, however the ecological physiology and metabolic interactions of distinct ANME lineages and their bacterial partners remains poorly understood. Here, we used a fluorescence azide-alkyne click chemistry technique known as BONCAT combined with FAC sorting to examine patterns in microbial membership and the genomes of single, metabolically active ANME-bacterial consortia recovered from methane seep sediments. This targeted consortia-level sequencing approach revealed significant diversity in the ANME-bacterial associations in situ as well as insights into the potential syntrophic mechanisms underpinning these enigmatic methane-fueled partnerships.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86857", "section":"Biogeosciences"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86871" } }
{"authors":"Matthew Newman::California Institute of Technology--Richard Kraus::Lawrence Livermore National Lab--June Wicks::Princeton University--Federica Coppari::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--Raymond Smith::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory--Thomas Duffy::Princeton University--", "title":"MR13C-2724: Shock Melting of Forsterite by In-Situ X-Ray Diffraction", "abstract":"The equation of state of magnesium silicates at pressures and temperatures near the solid-liquid coexistence curve is important for understanding the thermal evolution and interior structure of rocky planets. Here, we present a series of laser driven shock-melt experiments on single crystal Mg_2SiO_4 forsterite, conducted at the Omega EP laser facility. Particle velocities in the Mg_2SiO_4 samples were measured using a line VISAR and used to infer the thermodynamic state of the shocked samples. In situ X-ray diffraction measurements are used to probe the melting transition and investigate the potential decomposition of Mg_2SiO_4 in to MgO and MgSiO_3 upon melt. This work examines potential kinetic effects of decomposition due to the short time scale of laser-shock experiments. In addition, the thermodynamic data collected in these experiments adds to a limited body of information regarding the equation of state of Mg_2SiO_4, which is the dominant end member composition in Earth’s upper mantle. This work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86871", "section":"Mineral and Rock Physics"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "86875" } }
{"authors":"Andrew Revkin::Pace University New York--", "title":"GC14C-01: Arctic Warming as News – Perils and Possibilities", "abstract":"A science journalist in his 30th year covering human-driven climate change, including on three Arctic reporting trips, reflects on successes and setbacks as news media, environmentalists and Arctic communities have tried to convey the significance of polar change to a public for which the ends of the Earth will always largely be a place of the imagination. Novel challenges are arising in the 24/7 online media environment, as when a paper by a veteran climate scientist proposing a mechanism for abrupt sea-level rise became a big news story before it was accepted by the open-review journal to which it had been submitted. New science is digging in on possible connections between changing Arctic sea ice and snow conditions and disruptive winter weather in more temperate northern latitudes, offering a potential link between this distant region and the lives of ordinary citizens. As cutting-edge research, such work gets substantial media attention. But, as with all new areas of inquiry, uncertainty dominates – creating the potential for distracting the public and policymakers from the many aspects of anthropogenic climate change that are firmly established – but, in a way, boring because of that. With the challenges, there are unprecedented opportunities for conveying Arctic science. In some cases, researchers on expeditions are partnering with media, offering both scientists and news outlets fresh ways to convey the story of Arctic change in an era of resource constraints. Innovative uses of crittercams, webcams, and satellite observations offer educators and interested citizens a way to track and appreciate Arctic change. But more can be done to engage the public directly without the news media as an intermediary, particularly if polar scientists or their institutions test some of the established practices honed by more experienced communicators at NASA.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/86875", "section":"Global Environment Change"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "87257" } }
{"authors":"Nicole Oliphant::AGU--", "title":"10-3: test abstract submisson II", "abstract":"test abstract submisson", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/87257", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/87257", "section":""} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "93951" } }
{"authors":"Matthew Herman::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--William Yeck::USGS National Earthquake Information Center Golden--Jennifer Nealy::USGS National Earthquake Information Center Golden--Gavin Hayes::USGS National Earthquake Information Center Golden--William Barnhart::University of Iowa--Harley Benz::USGS National Earthquake Information Center Golden--Kevin Furlong::Pennsylvania State University Main Campus--", "title":"S54C-04: Integrated Geophysical Characteristics of the 2015 Illapel, Chile, Earthquake", "abstract":"On September 16th, 2015, an Mw 8.3 earthquake (USGS moment magnitude) ruptured offshore of central Chile, 50 km west of the city of Illapel and 200 km north of Santiago. The earthquake occurred just north of where the Juan Fernandez Ridge enters the subduction zone. In this study, we integrate multiple seismic and geodetic datasets, including multiple-event earthquake relocations; moment tensors of the Illapel mainshock, aftershocks, and prior regional seismicity; finite fault models (FFMs) of the mainshock rupture; subduction zone geometry; Coulomb stress transfer calculations; and co-seismic GPS offsets and InSAR images. These datasets allow us to (a) assess the context of the Illapel earthquake sequence with respect to historical seismicity in central Chile; (b) constrain the relationship between subduction geometry and the kinematic characteristics of the earthquake sequence; and (c) understand the distribution of aftershocks with respect to the rupture zone. Double source W-phase moment tensor analysis indicates the Illapel mainshock rupture began as a smaller Mw ~7.2 thrusting event before growing into a great-sized Mw 8.3 earthquake. Relocated aftershock seismicity is concentrated around the main region of slip, and few aftershocks occur on the megathrust shallower than ~15 km, despite the FFM indicating slip near the trench. This distribution is consistent with the aftershock behavior following the 2010 Maule and 2014 Iquique earthquakes: aftershocks primarily surround the rupture zones and are largely absent from regions of greatest slip. However, in contrast to the recent 2014 Iquique and 2010 Maule events, which ruptured in regions of the Chilean subduction zone that had not had large events in over a century, this earthquake occurred in a section of the subduction zone that hosted a large earthquake as recently as 1943, as well as earlier significant events in 1880 and 1822. At this section of the subduction zone, in addition to the impinging Juan Fernandez Ridge, the slab geometry changes from steeply dipping south of the Illapel earthquake to a nearly horizontal dip adjacent to the event. Combining these various observations provides insight into the links between regional tectonics and the timing and distribution of megathrust earthquakes at this segment of the central Chilean subduction zone.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/93951", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "93956" } }
{"authors":"Sergio Barrientos::University of Chile--", "title":"S54C-01: The 2015 Illapel Earthquake in Chile: Initial Findings", "abstract":"On September 16, 2015 at 19:54 hrs (local time) a magnitude 8.3 earthquake took place off the coast of the Coquimbo Region in central Chile. The National Seismological Centre (CSN) reported epicentral coordinates 71.864°W and 31.553°S and a W-phase magnitude of 8.4 This earthquake is the largest in the country since the February 27, 2010 event and the third largest since May 22, 1960, surpassing in size the one that took place off the coast of Iquique- Pisagua on April 1, 2014. Unlike the later, the 2015 earthquake showed no recognizable immediate precursor activity in the epicentral area. Focal mechanisms of the mainshock and larger aftershocks are consistent with the displacement of the Nazca plate beneath the South American plate. The previous large earthquakes of similar size took place in this region on April 6, 1943, with a magnitude of 7.9 (Beck et al., 1998); Abe (1979) lists this earthquake with tsunami magnitude equivalent to 8.2 Preliminary estimates of the slip distribution, based on GNSS data, indicate that the rupture length reaches about 200-250 km with a maximum displacement of the order of 6 m. Coastal uplift of 40 cm close to the epicentral area is evidenced by biological markers. The epicenter is not located either at the region of maximum or minimum slip, but where there is a strong fault displacement gradient. Number of daily aftershocks within the first four weeks is decaying with a p-value of the order of 0.8 to 1. An anomalous maximum acceleration of the order of 80% g was recorded on the E-W horizontal component of the station located at a station in Montepatria, more than 80 km away from the region of maximum slip. Because the general area recorded values of 30%g, it is very likely that this high acceleration is due to ground effects. Historical seismicity in the region is examined to understand the possible future scenarios of large earthquakes. To the north, the 1922 (Mw=8.4, Mt=8.7) has been the last to rupture this zone; to the south, the sequence of the events of 1971 and 1985 (Mw=7.8) are the last ones to take place. These earthquakes, together with the Mw8.2 1906 event apparently ruptured only the downdip section of the contact zone, because of the absence of a relevant tsunamis, implying that there is significant equivalent deformation accumulated to generate a 8.5+ event in the area.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/93956", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "93957" } }
{"authors":"Mark Simons::Seismological Laboratory, Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences, California Institute of Technology--Zacharie Duputel::Institut de Physique du Globe de Strasbourg--Junle Jiang::Seismological Laboratory, Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences, California Institute of Technology--Cunren Liang::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Eric Fielding::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Piyush Agram::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Susan Owen::Jet Propulsion Laboratory--Angelyn Moore::Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology--Hiroo Kanamori::Seismological Laboratory, Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences, California Institute of Technology--Luis Rivera::Institut de Physique du Globe de Strasbourg--Bryan Riel::Seismological Laboratory, Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences, California Institute of Technology--Francisco Ortega::University of Chile--", "title":"S54C-07: A combined geodetic and seismic model for the Mw 8.3 2015 Illapel (Chile) earthquake", "abstract":"The 2015 September 16 Mw 8.3 Illapel earthquake occurred on the subduction megathrust offshore of the Chilean coastline between the towns of Valparaiso and Coquimbo. This earthquake is the 3rdevent with Mw>8 to impact coastal Chile in the last 6 years. It occurred north of both the 2010 Mw 8.8 Maule earthquake and the 1985 Mw 8.0 Valparaiso earthquake. While the location of the 2015 earthquake is close to the inferred location of a large earthquake in 1943, comparison of seismograms from the two earthquakes suggests the recent event is not clearly a repeat of the 1943 event. To gain a better understanding of the distribution of coseismic fault slip, we develop a finite fault model that is constrained by a combination of static GPS offsets, Sentinel 1a ascending and descending radar interferograms, tsunami waveform measurements made at selected DART buoys, high rate (1 sample/sec) GPS waveforms and strong motion seismic data. Our modeling approach follows a Bayesian formulation devoid of a priori smoothing thereby allowing us to maximize spatial resolution of the inferred family of models. The adopted approach also attempts to account for major sources of uncertainty in the assumed forward models. At the inherent resolution of the model, the posterior ensemble of purely static models (without using high rate GPS and strong motion data) is characterized by a distribution of slip that reaches as much as 10 m in localized regions, with significant slip apparently reaching the trench or at least very close to the trench. Based on our W-phase point-source estimate, the event duration is approximately 1.7 minutes. We also present a joint kinematic model and describe the relationship of the coseismic model to the spatial distribution of aftershocks and post-seismic slip.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/93957", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "93958" } }
{"authors":"Diego Melgar::University of California Berkeley--Wenyuan Fan::Scripps Institution of Oceanography--Jianghui Geng::University of California San Diego--Sebastian Riquelme::University of Chile--Richard Allen::University of California Berkeley--Francisco Bravo::University of Chile--Juan Baez::Centro Sismologico National, Universidad de Chile--Hectór Parra::Instituto Geografico Militar--Sergio Barrientos::University of Chile--P. Fang::Scripps Institution of Oceanography--Peter Shearer::University of California San Diego--Yehuda Bock::University of California San Diego--Michael Bevis::Ohio State University--Dana Caccamise::The Ohio State University NOAA National Geodetic Survey--Christophe Vigny::CNRS--Marcos Moreno::Helmholtz Centre Potsdam GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences--Robert Smalley::Univ Memphis--", "title":"S54C-08: Slow rupture and slip to the trench during the 2015, Mw8.3 Illapel, Chile earthquake", "abstract":"We will discuss results of our analysis of the source of the 2015 Mw 8.3, Illapel, Chile, earthquake. We have produced a regional kinematic rupture model from the joint inversion of high-rate GPS, strong motion, local tide gauges and Sentinel-1A InSAR data. The results show that slip initiated at ~30km depth and propagated up-dip and down dip at ~2.2km/s. Upon reaching ~18km depth rupture slows down substantially to ~1.6km/s and propagates all the way to the trench. We correlate the slip inversion to tele-seismic back-projection obtained from North America stations to validate this complex behavior. Aftershock moment tensors show outer-rise normal faulting outboard of the large shallow slip but very little seismicity on the shallow megathrust surrounding the main asperity. This suggests that the shallow portion of the megathrust is weak and does not accumulate significant strain but that it can participate in coseismic rupture when rupture initiates deeper within the seimogenic zone. The shallow slip generated a substantial tsunami with observed amplitudes as large as 4m at local tide gauges and modeled amplitudes up to 10m. Tsunami arrivals to the near-source coastlines where recorded within 15minutes of rupture initiation. We will briefly discuss potential strategies for improving tsunami warning to the local coastline based on observations from this event.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/93958", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "93959" } }
{"authors":"Mauricio Fuentes::University of Chile--", "title":"S54C-03: A study of the 2015 Mw 8.3 Illapel Earthquake and tsunami: Numerical and Analytical approaches.", "abstract":"The recent Illapel Earthquake triggered a large tsunami causing economic losses and fatalities. In order to study the coastal effects, different finite fault models are used to define the initial condition for the tsunami simulation. The numerical code NEOWAVE is employed to obtain the tsunami evolution through the Pacific Ocean. Taking attention into the short time response, because the earthquake and tsunami sources are close to the coast, understanding of the near field run-up behavior is highly relevant for Chile. Therefore, an analytical solution of the 2+1 D shallow water wave equations is considered. With this solution, we estimate the run-up distribution, at first order, along the coastline. Field observations were measured in the surrounded coastal area of the earthquake, where the tsunami took place with higher penetration. We compare between the analytical and numerical solutions, to test how accurate is the method from the analytical point of view. Then, we compare both with field run-up measurements. We observe consistency between both approaches. To complete the analysis, a tsunami source inversion is performed using run-up field measurements, DART buoys and coastal tide gauges, then, the inversion is compared with the used seismic model.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/93959", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "93972" } }
{"authors":"Frederik Tilmann::Helmholtz Centre Potsdam GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences--Yong Zhang::Peking University--Marcos Moreno::Helmholtz Centre Potsdam GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences--Joachim Saul::GFZ Potsdam--Felix Eckelmann::Helmholtz Centre Potsdam GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences--Mauro Palo::Deutsches GeoForschungsZentrum GFZ--Zhiguo Deng::Helmholtz Centre Potsdam GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences--Kejie Chen::Helmholtz Centre Potsdam GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences--Juan Baez::Universidad de Chile--Andrey Babeyko::Helmholtz Centre Potsdam GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences--Bernd Schurr::GeoForschungsZemtrum Potsdam--Rongjiang Wang::Helmholtz Centre Potsdam GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences--Onno Oncken::Helmholtz Centre Potsdam GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences--Torsten Dahm::GFZ Potsdam--", "title":"S54C-05: The 2015 Illapel Earthquake, Central Chile, a Case of a Characteristic Earthquake?", "abstract":"On September 16, 2015, the Chilean margin experienced a great subduction megathrust earthquake. The MW=8.2 Illapel earthquake occurred in the Metropolitan segment north of where the Juan-Fernandez ridge meets the Chile trench and subduction style and geometry change. Combining GPS displacement measurements, InSAR interferograms, strong motion and broadband seismological waveforms, and high frequency (HF) teleseismic backprojection we derive a comprehensive description of the coseismic rupture. We further determine moment tensors and obtain accurate depth estimates for mostly offshore aftershock sequence by careful observations of teleseismic depth phases. The rupture nucleated near the coast but then propagated to the north and updip, with a circular geometry of diameter 100 km and a peak slip of ~6 m below the forearc. HF seismic radiation is mostly emitted downdip of the region of most intense slip, but unlike in most previous events the high frequency emitters do not track the whole rupture but are confined to a small region. The time evolution of HF seismic radiation also arrests earlier than the long period rupture evolution, indicating that the final phase of the rupture progressed more smoothly. The aftershocks, mostly plate interface events, extend significantly beyond the limits of the main rupture in both directions. In 1943, a comparable event struck the Illapel area. The similar extent of the aftershock zone and tsunami heights therefore make this part of the margin a candidate site for generating characteristic earthquakes. The approximate match of peak slip and accumulated slip deficit in the 72 years since the 1943 event also support this interpretation. However, the 1943 event appears to have had a shorter source time function and probably a smaller magnitude, pointing to differences in the detailed rupture evolution. The coupling is mostly close to fully locked in this area at least along the coast line but nevertheless the coseismic rupture is associated with a local peak in the locking pattern, whereas a narrow partially creeping area is found just to the south of the main rupture. Although locally the recent Illaped earthquake has relieved much of the accumulated stress, the segment immediately adjacent to the north remains unbroken since 1922, and presents a serious earthquake and tsunami hazard.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/93972", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "93973" } }
{"authors":"Christophe Vigny::CNRS--Sergio Ruiz::Universidad de Chile--Emilie Klein::Ecole Normale Supérieure Paris--Francisco Del-Campo::University of Chile--Efrain Rivera::Universidad de Chile--Piero Poli::Massachusetts Institute of Technology--Marianne Métois::University Claude Bernard Lyon 1--Juan Baez::Centro Sismologico National, Universidad de Chile--Gabriel Vargas Easton::Universidad de Chile--Felipe Leyton::Centro Sismologico National, Universidad de Chile--Raul Madariaga::Ecole Normale Supérieure Paris--Luce Fleitout::Ecole Normale Supérieure Paris--", "title":"S54C-06: Detailed  Analysis of the Illapel Mw 8.3 Earthquake Source and Nucleation from Geodetic and Seismological Data", "abstract":"The Illapel Mw 8.3 earthquake of 16 September 2015 broke a large area of a very well surveyed region in North-central Chile, where more than 15 high rate GPS instruments and ~50 survey benchmarks were installed starting from 2004. Previous studies had shown that the Coquimbo region near Illapel was 60% coupled on average and was part of the so-called ` metropolitan segment`  delimited by two low coupling zones (LCZ) : the two bays of La Serena, near 30°S in the north and San Antonio, near 34°S in the South. To understand the seismic rupture, we studied the coseismic displacement, the rupture propagation, the location and mechanisms of the aftershocks and computed GPS time series. We observed that after the 2010 Mw 8.8 Maule mega earthquake, the upper plate deformation decreased in the 2010 rupture area but increased by about 15% north of it, in the Illapel region. We attribute this decrease/increase to viscous strain relaxation occurred in the asthenosphere after Maule 2010 (and still going on). The area where deformation increased, within the metropolitan segment, agrees well with the slip distribution we determined from the inversion of GPS data : from 32°S to 30.5°S. Therefore we postulate that the deep transient slow slip triggered the Illapel earthquake, which explains why it occurred now but ruptured only half of the metropolitan segment.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/93973", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "93974" } }
{"authors":"Diana Comte::University of Chile, FCFM-AMTC--Daniel Carrizo::University of Chile FCFM-AMTC--Sophie Peyrat::Geosciences Montpellier, UMR5242, Universite Montpellier 2--Raymond Russo::University of Florida--Steven Roecker::Rensselaer Polytechnic Inst--Tomas Opazo::University of Chile FCFM-AMTC--Gerardo Peña::University of Chile FCFM-AMTC--Sebastian Baeza::University of Chile FCFM-AMTC--Romina Arriaza::University of Chile FCFM-AMTC--Francisco Ortega-Culaciati::University of Chile FCFM--Javier Ruiz::University of Chile FCFM--Eduardo Contreras-Reyes::University of Chile FCFM--Valeria Becerra::University of Chile FCFM--", "title":"S54C-02: The September 16, 2015 Illapel (Mw 8.3) Earthquake: Comprehensive Analysis from Seismic and Geodetic Observations", "abstract":"On September 16th, 2015 an Mw=8.3 struck the Illapel zone between 30°- 32.5°S along an area between the trench and the coastline, including the activation of outer-rise seismicity. The rupture area of this earthquake covers the 1943 previous large earthquake, and also seems to overlap with the northern end of the rupture of the 1971 and 1985 earthquakes. Immediately after the occurrence of the 2015 earthquake, we deployed 18 3-components short period continuous recording seismic stations to complement the coverage of the University of Chile National Seismological Center (CSN) permanent broad band seismic network and four temporary seismic stations deployed by the CSN. The short period stations will be replaced by IRIS PASCAL broad band stations through the NSF RAPID Collaborative Proposal (U. of Florida, RPI, and U. of Chile), generating an open-access data set that, along with the seismological and geodetic observations from CSN permanent networks, provide the best quality data that can be utilized immediately by a wide range of PIs and institutions around the world. Such datasets able us to pursue these main goals: 1) aftershock monitoring, focal mechanism and analysis related with the interplate rupture zone; 2) imaging the seismic structure of the 2015 Illapel rupture area; 3) characterization of the mechanical behavior of the subduction interface from geodetic observations before, during and after the earthquake, 4) identification and characterization of low frequency and/or slow slip aftershocks; characterization of seismic amplification effects and the consequent hazard determination.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/93974", "section":"Seismology"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "94015" } }
{"authors":"Majd Mayyasi::Boston University--", "title":"SM52B-03: Scarf Award Invited Talk", "abstract":"The accessibility of the Martian atmosphere to spacecraft provides an opportunity tostudy an ionosphere that differs from our own. Yet, despite the half century ofmeasurements made at Mars, the current state of the neutral atmosphere and its embeddedplasma (ionosphere) remains largely uncharacterized. Until the recent NASA MAVENmission, in situ measurements of the neutral and ionized constituents versus heightexisted only from the two Viking Landers from the 1970s. Subsequent satellite andremote sensing data offer sparse global coverage of the ionosphere. Thermalcharacteristics of the plasma environment are not well understood. Patchy crustalmagnetic fields interact with the Martian plasma in a way that has not been fully studied. Hence, investigating the coupled compositional, thermal and crustal-field- affectedproperties of the ionosphere can provide insight into comparative systems at Earth andother planets, as well as to atypical processes such as the solar wind interaction withtopside ionospheric plasma and associated pathways to escape. Ionospheric models are fundamental tools that advance our understanding of complexplasma systems. A pre-existing one-dimensional model of the Martian ionosphere hasbeen upgraded to include more comprehensive chemistry and transport physics. This newBU Mars Ionosphere Model has been used to study the composition, thermal structureand dynamics of the Martian ionosphere. Specifically: the sensitivity of the abundance ofions to neutral atmospheric composition has been quantified, diurnal patterns of ion andelectron temperatures have been derived self-consistently using supra- thermal electronheating rates, and the behavior of ionospheric plasma in crustal field regions wassimulated by constructing a two-dimensional ionospheric model. Results from thesestudies were compared with measurements and show that (1) ion composition at Mars ishighly sensitive to the abundance of neutral molecular and atomic hydrogen, (2) lighterions heat up more efficiently than heavier ones and provide additional heating sources forcooler plasma, and (3) crustal field morphology affects plasma dynamics and structure atMars in a way that is consistent with observations. Finally, model predictions of ioncomposition and plasma temperatures are provided for observations to be made byseveral instruments on board the MAVEN orbiter.", "url":"https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm15/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/94015", "section":"Magnetospheric Physics"}  