{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "56085" } }
{"authors":"Jose Campos-Enriquez::Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico||Víctor Ramón::BUAP Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla||Javier Lermo-Samaniego::Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico||", "title":"T51A-2851: Shallow crustal structure of eastern-central Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt.", "abstract":"Central-eastern Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt (TMVB) is featured by large basins (i.e., Toluca, Mexico, Puebla-Tlaxcala, Libres-Oriental). It has been supposed that major crustal faults limit these basins. Sierra de Las Cruces range separates the Toluca and Mexico basins. The Sierra Nevada range separates Mexico basin from the Puebla-Tlaxcala basin. Based in gravity and seismic data we inferred the Toluca basin is constituted by the Ixtlahuaca sub-basin, to the north, and the Toluca sub-basin to the south, which are separated by a relative structural high. The Toluca depression is more symmetric and bounded by sub-vertical faults. In particular its eastern master fault controlled the emplacement of Sierra de Las Cruces range. Easternmost Acambay graben constitutes the northern and deepest part of the Ixtlahuaca depression. The Toluca–Ixtlahuaca basin is inside the Taxco-San Miguel de Allende fault system, and limited to the west by the Guerrero terrane which continues beneath the TMVB up to the Acambay graben. Mexico basin basement occupies an intermediate position and featured by a relative structural high to the north-east, as established by previous studies. This relative structural high is limited to the west by the north-south Mixhuca trough, while to the south it is bounded by the east-west Copilco-Xochimilco-Chalco sub-basin. The Puebla-Tlaxcala basin basement is the shallowest of these 3 tectonic depressions. In general, features (i.e., depth) and relationship between these basins, from west to east, are controlled by the regional behavior of the Sierra Madre Oriental fold and thrust belt basement (i.e., Oaxaca Complex?). This study indicates that an active east-west regional fault system limits to the south the TMVB (from the Nevado de Toluca volcano through the Popocatepetl volcano and eastward along southern Puebla-Tlaxcala basin). The Tenango and La Pera fault systems constituting the western part of this regional fault system coincide with northern exposures of the Morelos platform to the west. The eastward extension of this system limits the northern Acatlan Complex exposures. Accordingly, eastern TMVB has been subjected to extension and associated faults are being activated at present. The basins act as independent crustal blocks. The Puebla-Tlaxcala and the Tehuacan basins merge to the east."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "57282" } }
{"authors":"Braden Walsh::Massey University||Arthur Jolly::GNS Science-Institute of Geological and Nuclear Sciences Ltd||John Procter::Massey University||", "title":"S51D-2746: Dynamics of the 13 October 2012 Te Maari, New Zealand Dam Breakout Lahar Determined from Multi-Parameter Data and its Implications for Monitoring", "abstract":"On 6 August 2012 a 7.0x105 m3 debris flow dammed up the Upper Te Maari flow channel forming a 50,000 m3 ephemeral lake. The ephemeral lake filled up from runoff and heavy rainfall over a two month period until 13 October 2012 where saturated sediments and trapped lake water overtopped the debris flow dam at 11:20 UTC, thus creating a lahar approximately 10 minutes later at 11:30 UTC through remobilizing the older debris flow deposits. The lahar lasted for about 30 minutes flowing down the channel as a succession of multiple surges that could possibly be attributed to a series of down cuts and subsequent breakouts of the debris flow dam. A correlation between the lahar seismic signals and active seismic source data collected in February 2013 from the same flow channel is used to understand the dynamics of the 13 October 2012 lahar. In comparing the two data sets a frequency band of 3-10 Hz is used to estimate the lahar energy at 4.87x109 Nm. The best correlated location for the lahar from the active source data is estimated to be at the ephemeral lake or within 1.0 km down the channel. Through the use of the active source method to determine the dynamics of the lahar, monitoring and the understanding of mass flows in the Te Maari area can be improved."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58179" } }
{"authors":"Padma V V L::National Remote Sensing center Research Scholar||", "title":"B53B-0542: Aboveground Biomass and Dynamics of Forest Attributes using LiDAR Data and Vegetation Model", "abstract":"In recent years, biomass estimation for tropical forests has received much attention because of the fact that regional biomass is considered to be a critical input to climate change. Biomass almost determines the potential carbon emission that could be released to the atmosphere due to deforestation or conservation to non-forest land use. Thus, accurate biomass estimation is necessary for better understating of deforestation impacts on global warming and environmental degradation. In this context, forest stand height inclusion in biomass estimation plays a major role in reducing the uncertainty in the estimation of biomass. The improvement in the accuracy in biomass shall also help in meeting the MRV objectives of REDD+. Along with the precise estimate of biomass, it is also important to emphasize the role of vegetation models that will most likely become an important tool for assessing the effects of climate change on potential vegetation dynamics and terrestrial carbon storage and for managing terrestrial ecosystem sustainability. Remote sensing is an efficient way to estimate forest parameters in large area, especially at regional scale where field data is limited. LIDAR (Light Detection And Ranging) provides accurate information on the vertical structure of forests. We estimated average tree canopy heights and AGB from GLAS waveform parameters by using a multi-regression linear model in forested area of Madhya Pradesh (area-3,08,245 km2), India. The derived heights from ICESat-GLAS were correlated with field measured tree canopy heights for 60 plots. Results have shown a significant correlation of R2= 74% for top canopy heights and R2= 57% for stand biomass. The total biomass estimation 320.17 Mt and canopy heights are generated by using random forest algorithm. These canopy heights and biomass maps were used in vegetation models to predict the changes biophysical/physiological characteristics of forest according to the changing climate. In our study we have used Dynamic Global Vegetation Model to understand the possible vegetation dynamics in the event of climate change. The vegetation represents a biogeographic regime. Simulations were carried out for 70 years time period. The model produced leaf area index and biomass for each plant functional type and biome for each grid in that region."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58180" } }
{"authors":"Enrico Scoccimarro::National Institute of Geophysics and Volcanology Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia/Centro Euro-Mediterraneo sui Cambiamenti Climatici||Gabriele Villarini::University of Iowa||Marcello Vichi::-||Matteo Zampieri::Euro-Mediterranean Center on Climate Change||Pier Fogli::Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia/Centro Euro-Mediterraneo sui Cambiamenti Climatici||Alessio Bellucci::CMCC - Bologna||Silvio Gualdi::CMCC - Bologna||", "title":"A53E-01: Projected Changes in Intense Precipitation over Europe at the Daily and Sub-Daily Time Scales", "abstract":"Heavy precipitation is a major hazard over Europe. It is well established that climate model projections indicate a tendency towards more extreme daily rainfall events. It is still uncertain, however, how this changing intensity translates at the sub-daily time scales. The main goal of the present study is to examine possible differences in projected changes in intense precipitation events over Europe at the daily and sub-daily (3-hourly) time scales using a state-of-the-art climate model. The focus will be on one Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP8.5), considered as illustrative of a high rate of increase in greenhouse gas concentrations over this century. There are statistically significant differences in intense precipitation projections (up to 40%) when comparing the results at the daily and sub-daily time scales. Over north-eastern Europe, projected precipitation intensification at the 3-hour scale is lower than at the daily scale. On the other hand, Spain and the western seaboard exhibit an opposite behaviour, with stronger intensification at the 3-hour scale rather than daily scale. While the mean properties of the precipitation distributions are independent of the analysed frequency, projected precipitation intensification exhibits regional differences. This finding has implications on the extrapolation of impacts of intense precipitation events, given the daily time scale the analyses are usually performed at."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58184" } }
{"authors":"Andreas Hartmann::Freiburg University University of Bristol||", "title":"PP21D-01: Overview of karst modeling approaches and their relevance for paleoclimate reconstruction", "abstract":"There is a gap of incorporating hydrological variability into paleoclimate reconstruction with speleothem analysis. The influence of flow and transport processes in karst systems on drip water composition is not well understood resulting in unknown uncertainties. Recent studies included hydrological models in their calculations but many of them use lumped approaches with limited potential to characterise local variability in water movement and storage. This presentation will explore different conceptual models of karst systems and their heterogeneities, and how they can be translated into numerical models of varying complexity. They go along with varying data requirements and degree of process representation. Special focus will be set on the assessment of model parameters at different spatial and temporal scales including applications that range back far beyond the present."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58185" } }
{"authors":"Ian Fairchild::Univ Birmingham||Andy Baker::University of New South Wales||Martin Andersen::University of New South Wales||Pauline Treble::Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation||", "title":"PP21D-04: Mass balance approaches to understanding evolution of dripwater chemistry", "abstract":"Forward and inverse modelling of dripwater chemistry is a fast-developing area in speleothem science. Such approaches can incorporate theoretical, parameterized or observed relationships between forcing factors and water composition, but at the heart is mass balance: a fundamental principle that provides important constraints. Mass balance has been used in speleothem studies to trace the evolution of dissolved inorganic carbon and carbon isotopes from soil to cave, and to characterize the existence and quantification of prior calcite precipitation (PCP) based on ratios of Mg and Sr to Ca. PCP effects can dominate slow drips, whereas fast drips are more likely to show a residual variability linked to soil-biomass processes. A possible configuration of a more complete mass balance model is illustrated in the figure. Even in humid temperate climates, evapotranspiration can be 50% of total atmospheric precipitation leading to substantially raised salt contents and there can be significant exchange with biomass. In more arid settings, at least seasonal soil storage of salts is likely. Golgotha Cave in SW Australia is in a Mediterranean climate with a strong summer soil moisture deficit. The land surface is forested leading to large ion fluxes related to vegetation. There are also periodic disturbances related to fire. Mass balance approaches have been applied to an 8-year monitoring record. Inter-annual trends of elements coprecipitated in speleothems from fast drips are predicted to be dominated by biomass effects."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58186" } }
{"authors":"Robin Matoza::University of California, Santa Barbara||David Green::AWE Blacknest||Alexis LE Pichon::CEA Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique DAM||David Fee::University of Alaska Fairbanks||Peter Shearer::University of California San Diego||Pierrick Mialle::CTBTO Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Organization||Lars Ceranna::BGR Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources||", "title":"S54B-02: Detecting and Cataloging Global Explosive Volcanism Using the IMS Infrasound Network", "abstract":"Explosive volcanic eruptions are among the most powerful sources of infrasound observed on earth, with recordings routinely made at ranges of hundreds to thousands of kilometers. These eruptions can also inject large volumes of ash into heavily travelled aviation corridors, thus posing a significant societal and economic hazard. Detecting and counting the global occurrence of explosive volcanism helps with progress toward several goals in earth sciences and has direct applications in volcanic hazard mitigation. This project aims to build a quantitative catalog of global explosive volcanic activity using the International Monitoring System (IMS) infrasound network. We are developing methodologies to search systematically through IMS infrasound array detection bulletins to identify signals of volcanic origin. We combine infrasound signal association and source location using a brute-force, grid-search, cross-bearings approach. The algorithm corrects for a background prior rate of coherent infrasound signals in a global grid. When volcanic signals are identified, we extract metrics such as location, origin time, acoustic intensity, signal duration, and frequency content, compiling the results into a catalog. We are testing and validating our method on several well-known case studies, including the 2009 eruption of Sarychev Peak, Kuriles, the 2010 eruption of Eyjafjallajökull, Iceland, and the 2015 eruption of Calbuco, Chile. This work represents a step toward the goal of integrating IMS data products into global volcanic eruption early warning and notification systems. Additionally, a better characterization of volcanic signal detection helps improve understanding of operational event detection, discrimination, and association capabilities of the IMS network."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58187" } }
{"authors":"Pedro Costa::Universidade de Lisboa||Guy Gelfenbaum::USGS California Water Science Center Sacramento||SeanPaul La Selle::USGS Pacific Coastal and Marine Science Center Santa Cruz||Susana Costas::CIMA, Universidade do Algarve||Cesar Andrade::Centro de Geologia da Universidade de Lisboa||João Cascalho::Museu Nacional de História Natural e da Ciência||Maria Freitas::Faculdade de Ciencias da Universidade de Lisboa||", "title":"NH23D-01: Modelling tsunami sedimentation associated with the AD 1755 event in Algarve (Portugal)", "abstract":"Numerical models of tsunami inundation and sedimentation can provide useful insights into the dynamics of palaeotsunamis. We applied a coupled field data and numerical modelling approach for the AD1755 tsunami, the most destructive tsunami to affect the Atlantic coast of Europe in historical times. At Salgados, a lowland on the south coast of Portugal, tsunami deposits from AD1755 mostly consist of massive or normally-graded, landward thinning layers of shell-rich sand with an erosive base within the mud-dominated lowlands. Landward of the foredune, the AD1755 deposit is roughly 10cm thick and thins in the landward and alongshore directions. It is possible to ascribe the sediment source of this deposit to the dune and/or beach based on mineralogical and grain-size comparisons with modern surface samples. The present dune crest height is 6 m above MSL (mean sea level) near the seasonally-closed inlet of the lagoon, and rises alongshore towards the west up to 17m above MSL. From the combination of the spatial distribution of the deposit thickness landward of the sloping dune, and GPR data, which shows an erosional surface at approximately 6m above MSL, we infer that the maximum tsunami water level at the coast was between 6 and 10m. Regional tsunami historical records, however, suggest higher heights, up to 12m above MSL at the coast. We simulated tsunami inundation and sediment transport using Delft3D to examine these discrepancies. A 1D cross shore model was used to test flow height controls on deposit thickness and also to identify the sediment source of the AD1755 deposit. Four possible sediment sources were tested (nearshore, beach, dune and lagoon) using synthetic, long-period waves to simulate the AD1755 tsunami. The combination of geological studies with numerical modeling of inundation and sediment transport produces a better description of the AD1755 tsunami and its effects in coastal areas in the Algarve that will contribute to better hazard assessments."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58189" } }
{"authors":"Jason English::NOAA Boulder University of Colorado at Boulder||Owen Toon::Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics University of Colorado at Boulder||Michael Mills::National Center for Atmospheric Research||", "title":"U34A-02: What do we need to know to model the microphysical evolution of volcanic clouds and how can we make these measurements?", "abstract":"Large volcanic eruptions can inject millions of tons of ash, sulfate and gaseous precursors into the stratosphere. The magnitude and duration of the volcanic cloud on Earth's temperatures, circulation, clouds, and stratospheric ozone is strongly affected by the microphysical properties of the aerosol size distribution, which can evolve in complex ways. This presentation will cover the impacts and uncertainties associated with microphysical aerosol measurements and modeling of the 1991 Mount Pinatubo eruption, and valuable future measurements after the next large volcanic eruption. These additional measurements can help improve our understanding of stratospheric processes as well as possible consequences of large volcanic eruptions and hypothetical geoengineering scenarios on radiative forcing and chemistry."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58194" } }
{"authors":"Stephen Arrowsmith::Sandia National Laboratories||", "title":"NH32C-03: Infrasound Monitoring of Natural Hazards", "abstract":"Infrasound is generated by a wide variety of energetic natural and anthropogenic phenomena that originate in the solid earth, ocean, and atmosphere. Because the absorption of infrasound is low, it can propagate long distances through atmospheric waveguides, making it a valuable tool for remote monitoring of hazards. Advances in using infrasound for monitoring energetic events in the solid earth, oceans, and atmosphere are being driven by the wealth of new datasets in addition to advances in modeling source and propagation physics. This presentation provides an overview of recent advances in infrasound monitoring of natural hazards, focusing on selected hazards in the earth (earthquakes and volcanoes), ocean (tsunamis), and atmosphere (meteoroids)."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58199" } }
{"authors":"Pawan Bhartia::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center||Michael McCormick::Hampton University||Robert Loughman::Ctr Atmospheric Sciences||", "title":"U34A-06: Volcanic Aerosols from Satellites: Current and Emerging Capabilities", "abstract":"There are 5 instruments currently operating in space with capability to measure stratospheric aerosols. Two of these are lidar backscatter instruments (CALIOP & ISS/CATS) that provide high vertical resolution, day/night coverage, and polarization information to separate ice clouds from sulfate aerosols. Two are limb scattering instruments (OSIRIS & OMPS-LP) with high sensitivity to aerosols and provide extensive spatial coverage of the sunlit globe. And a Canadian solar occultation instrument (ACE-MAESTRO) measures aerosol extinction twice per orbit. Next year we are expecting the launch of the SAGE III instrument on ISS with capability to measure aerosol extinction and Angstrom Exponent (AE) at multiple wavelengths by solar and lunar occultation techniques. It also has limb scattering capability to provide spatial coverage between solar occultations. The 51.6˚ inclination of the ISS orbit will allow SAGE III to measure aerosol scattering across the gobe for a wide range of scattering angles. Therefore, ISS SAGE III has the capability to provide vertically resolved information about a wide variety of aerosol properties, potentially including aerosol extinction, size distribution, refractive index, and particle shape parameters, similar to the one provided by the ground-based almucantar technique. In our talk we will focus primarily on the synergy between the OMPS LP instrument that has been flying on the Suomi NPP satellite since October 2011 and ISS SAGE III. We will show how these measurements can be combined together to capture spatial and temporal evolution of aerosols and ozone in large volcanic plumes to validate models and to support field campaigns."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58200" } }
{"authors":"Arlindo da Silva::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center||Cynthia Randles::Morgan State University||Virginie Buchard::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center||Anton Darmenov::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center||Peter Colarco::NASA Goddard Space Flight Center||", "title":"A24E-01: The MERRA-2 Aerosol Reanalysis", "abstract":"MERRA-2 is NASA's latest reanalysis for the satellite era (1980-present) using GEOS-5 earth system model. This project focuses on historical analyses of the hydrological cycle on a broad range of weather and climate time scales, and includes interactive aerosols for the entire period. MERRA-2 provides several improvements over its predecessor MERRA reanalysis, including: 1) modern satellite observing systems not available with MERRA, 2) reduction in discontinuities associated with a changing observing system, and 3) reduced biases and imbalances in the hydrologic cycle. As another step towards an integrated Earth System Analysis (IESA), MERRA-2 includes for the first time aerosols in a reanalysis, improves the representation of stratospheric ozone, and better characterizes cryospheric processes. In this talk we will present results relating to the introduction of aerosols in MERRA-2. The assimilation of Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD) in GEOS-5 involves very careful cloud screening and homogenization of the observing system by means of a Neural Net scheme that translates MODIS and AVHRR radiances into AERONET calibrated AOD. The system also assimilates MISR and AERONET AOD observations. For the EOS period (2000-present) GEOS-5 is driven by daily biomass burning emissions derived from MODIS fire radiative power retrievals using the so-called QFED emissions. Historical emissions are calibrated as to minimize discontinuities the EOS/pre-EOS boundaries. MERRA-2 aerosols are also driven by historical anthropogenic and volcanic emissions. We will present a summary of our efforts to validate the MERRA-2 aerosols. The GEOS-5 assimilated aerosol fields are first validated by comparison to independent in-situ measurements. In order to assess aerosol absorption on a global scale, we perform a detailed radiative transfer calculation to simulate the UV aerosol index, comparing our results to OMI measurements. By simulating aerosol-attenuated backscatter, we use CALIPSO measurements to evaluate the vertical structure of our aerosol estimates, in particular in regions where we have larger discrepancies with OMI. Finally, the consistency of our AOD estimates with estimates from MODIS/Deep Blue, OMI and PARASOL will be briefly discussed."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58202" } }
{"authors":"Elisabeth Blanc::CEA Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique DAM||", "title":"S54B-05: Dynamics of the middle atmosphere as observed by the ARISE project", "abstract":"It has been strongly demonstrated that variations in the circulation of the middle atmosphere influence weather and climate all the way to the Earth’s surface. A key part of this coupling occurs through the propagation and breaking of planetary and gravity waves. However, limited observations prevent to faithfully reproduce the dynamics of the middle atmosphere in numerical weather prediction and climate models. The main challenge of the ARISE (Atmospheric dynamics InfraStructure in Europe) project is to combine existing national and international observation networks including: the International infrasound monitoring system developed for the CTBT (Comprehensive nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty) verification, the NDACC (Network for the Detection of Atmospheric Composition Changes) lidar network, European observation infrastructures at mid latitudes (OHP observatory), tropics (Maïdo observatory), high latitudes (ALOMAR and EISCAT), infrasound stations which form a dense European network and satellites. The ARISE network is unique by its coverage (polar to equatorial regions in the European longitude sector), its altitude range (from troposphere to mesosphere and ionosphere) and the involved scales both in time (from seconds to tens of years) and space (from tens of meters to thousands of kilometers). Advanced data products are produced with the scope to assimilate data in the Weather Prediction models to improve future forecasts over weeks and seasonal time scales. ARISE observations are especially relevant for the monitoring of extreme events such as thunderstorms, volcanoes, meteors and at larger scales, deep convection and stratospheric warming events for physical processes description and study of long term evolution with climate change. Among the applications, ARISE fosters integration of innovative methods for remote detection of non-instrumented volcanoes including distant eruption characterization to provide notifications with reliable confidence indices to the civil aviation."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58203" } }
{"authors":"Paul Segall::Dept Geophysics||", "title":"MR41E-01: Poroelastic and Earthquake Nucleation Effects in Injection Induced Seismicity", "abstract":"The standard model of injection-induced seismicity considers changes in Coulomb strength due solely to changes in pore-pressure. We consider two additional effects: full poro-elastic coupling of stress and pore-pressure, and time dependent earthquake nucleation. Stress and pore-pressure due to specified injection rate are modeled in a homogeneous, poroelastic medium. Stress and pore-pressure are used to compute seismicity rate through the Dieterich [1994] model. For constant injection rate, the time to reach a critical seismicity rate scales with t ~ r^2/(c f_c), where r is distance from the injector, c is hydraulic diffusivity, and f_c is a factor that depends on mechanical properties, and weakly on r. The seismicity rate decays following a peak, consistent with some observations. During injection poro-elastic coupling may increase or decrease the seismicity rate, depending on the orientation of the faults relative to the injector. If injection induced stresses inhibit slip, abrupt shut-in can lead to locally sharp increases in seismicity rate; tapering the flux mitigates this effect. The maximum magnitude event has been observed to occur post-injection. We suggest the seismicity rate at a given magnitude depends on the nucleation rate, the size distribution of fault segments, and if the background shear stress is low, the time varying volume of perturbed crust. This leads to a roll-over in frequency magnitude distribution for larger events, with a corner that increases with time. Larger events are absent at short times, but approach the background frequency with time; larger events occurring post shut-in are thus not unexpected."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58204" } }
{"authors":"Alfred McEwen::University of Arizona||", "title":"P14B-01: Ground-Breaking Geologic Processes in the Solar System", "abstract":"NASA mission proposals of today must promise “ground-breaking” new results. “Ground-breaking” is a buzzword, but sounds good to a geologist who likes to study active processes. Great progress in understanding active processes on the Moon and Mars has resulted from very-high-resolution (sub-meter scale) repeat imaging (monitoring) by LROC and HiRISE. Such changes include new impact craters and mass wasting on both the Moon and Mars. One martian surprise was not just finding that the gullies or ravines are forming today, but that they are forming in times and places with CO2 frost on the ground. The geomorphology of these gullies is a perfect match for water-carved gullies on Earth, but the CO2 buffers the ground and air temperatures to near 150 K, far too cold for liquid water to play a role. Snapshot geomorphology, even at very high resolution, does not enable a unique interpretation of geologic processes. Repeat imaging led to discovery of the martian Recurring Slope Lineae (RSL), which form at the warmest times and places and may be seeps of salty water. A source of water in a non-polar location is needed to support a future human presence on Mars, but Planetary Protection will be a challenge (or impossible). Jupiter’s moon Io is the ideal natural laboratory to understand groundbreaking volcanism and tectonism. Very large-scale energetic processes that have shaped the planets are active today on Jupiter’s moon Io, so this is the best place to study these processes. Is there active venting on Europa? We don’t know (yet) because we haven’t looked with the proper combination of resolution (<20 km), phase angle, and coverage. Understanding active geologic and atmospheric processes and how they affect spectral signatures will determine the interpretability of exoplanet spectra and inform the search for ET life. However, the most amazing planetary habitability experiment in this arm of the galaxy is Earth."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58206" } }
{"authors":"Sarah Stewart::University of California Davis||Simon Lock::Harvard University||", "title":"MR21D-02: The Thermal States of Accreting Planets: From Mars-like Embryos to a MAD Earth", "abstract":"The thermal states of rocky planets can vary widely during the process of accretion. The thermal structure affects several major processes on the growing planet, including the mechanics of core formation, pressure-temperature conditions for metal-silicate equilibration, mixing, and atmospheric erosion. Because impact energy is distributed heterogeneously, accretional energy is preferentially deposited in the gravitationally re-equilibrated outer layers of the planet for both small and giant impacts. The resulting stably stratified structure inhibits complete mixing within the mantle. Initially, the specific energy of giant impacts between Mars-mass embryos leads to melting of the mantle. However, as planet formation progresses, the specific energies of giant impacts increase and can drive the mantle into a transient supercritical state. In the hottest regions of the planet, metal and silicates are miscible, and metal exsolution occurs as the structure cools. The cooling time of the supercritical structure is typically longer than the timescale for metal segregation to the core. Thus, these high temperature excursions during planet formation are significant for understanding metal-silicate equilibration. Furthermore, when a supercritical planet is also rapidly rotating, the mantle, atmosphere and disk (MAD) form a continuous dynamic and thermodynamic structure. Lunar origin by condensation from a MAD Earth can explain the major characteristics of the Moon (Lock et al., this meeting). One of the greatest uncertainties in understanding the thermal states of planets during accretion is the changing composition and mass of the atmosphere. After the dispersal of the solar nebula, the thermal boundary condition imposed by the atmosphere can vary between silicate vapor and condensed ices. The coupled problem of atmospheric origin and planetary accretion can be used to constrain the many uncertainties in the growth and divergence of the terrestrial planets in our solar system."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58208" } }
{"authors":"Jennifer Kay::University of Colorado Boulder||Brian Medeiros::National Center for Atmospheric Research||Vineel Kumar Reddy Yettella::University of Colorado Boulder||Cecile Hannay::NCAR||Peter Caldwell::Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory||Casey Wall::University of Washington||Cecilia Bitz::Univ of Washington||", "title":"A43J-05: Global climate impacts of fixing the Southern Ocean shortwave radiation bias in the Community Earth System Model (CESM)", "abstract":"A large, long-standing, and pervasive climate model bias is excessive absorbed shortwave radiation (ASR) over the mid-latitude oceans, especially the Southern Ocean. We investigate both the underlying mechanisms for and climate impacts of this bias within the Community Earth System Model with the Community Atmosphere Model version 5 (CESM-CAM5). Excessive Southern Ocean ASR in CESM-CAM5 results in part because low-level clouds contain insufficient amounts of supercooled liquid. In a present-day atmosphere-only run, an observationally motivated modification to the shallow convection detrainment increases supercooled cloud liquid, brightens low-level clouds, and substantially reduces the Southern Ocean ASR bias. Tuning to maintain global energy balance enables reduction of a compensating tropical ASR bias. In the resulting pre-industrial fully coupled run with a brighter Southern Ocean and dimmer Tropics, the Southern Ocean cools and the Tropics warm. As a result of the enhanced meridional temperature gradient, poleward heat transport increases in both hemispheres (especially the Southern Hemisphere) and the Southern Hemisphere atmospheric jet strengthens. Cross-equatorial heat transport increases in the ocean, but not in the atmosphere. As a result, a proposed atmospheric teleconnection that links Southern Ocean ASR bias reduction and cooling with northward shifts in the Intertropical Convergence Zone is not found. All results discussed above are for the transient response. Ongoing work to assess the equilibrium response and the impact of the fix climate change experiments results will also be presented."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58209" } }
{"authors":"Alexei Gorbatov::Geoscience Australia||James O'Connell::Griffith University||Kuldip Paliwal::Griffith University||", "title":"NH23A-1847: The Application of Speaker Recognition Techniques in the Detection of Tsunamigenic Earthquakes", "abstract":"Tsunami warning procedures adopted by national tsunami warning centres largely rely on the classical approach of earthquake location, magnitude determination, and the consequent modelling of tsunami waves. Although this approach is based on known physics theories of earthquake and tsunami generation processes, this may be the main shortcoming due to the need to satisfy minimum seismic data requirement to estimate those physical parameters. At least four seismic stations are necessary to locate the earthquake and a minimum of approximately 10 minutes of seismic waveform observation to reliably estimate the magnitude of a large earthquake similar to the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami Earthquake of M9.2. Consequently the total time to tsunami warning could be more than half an hour. In attempt to reduce the time of tsunami alert a new approach is proposed based on the classification of tsunamigenic and non tsunamigenic earthquakes using speaker recognition techniques. A Tsunamigenic Dataset (TGDS) was compiled to promote the development of machine learning techniques for application to seismic trace analysis and, in particular, tsunamigenic event detection, and compare them to existing seismological methods. The TGDS contains 227 off shore events (87 tsunamigenic and 140 non-tsunamigenic earthquakes with M≥6) from Jan 2000 to Dec 2011, inclusive. A Support Vector Machine classifier using a radial-basis function kernel was applied to spectral features derived from 400 sec frames of 3-comp. 1-Hz broadband seismometer data. Ten-fold cross-validation was used during training to choose classifier parameters. Voting was applied to the classifier predictions provided from each station to form an overall prediction for an event. The F1 score (harmonic mean of precision and recall) was chosen to rate each classifier as it provides a compromise between type-I and type-II errors, and due to the imbalance between the representative number of events in the tsunamigenic and non-tsunamigenic classes. The described classifier achieved an F1 score of 0.923, with tsunamigenic classification precision and recall/sensitivity of 0.928 and 0.919 respectively. The system requires a minimum of 3 stations with ~400 seconds of data each to make a prediction. The accuracy improves as further stations and data become available."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58210" } }
{"authors":"Ming Chun Ke::NCDR National Science and Technology Center for Disaster Reduction of Taiwan||", "title":"NH13B-1919: Planning a Preliminary program for Earthquake Loss Estimation and Emergency Operation by Three-dimensional Structural Model of Active Faults", "abstract":"Large scale earthquakes often cause serious economic losses and a lot of deaths. Because the seismic magnitude, the occurring time and the occurring location of earthquakes are still unable to predict now. The pre-disaster risk modeling and post-disaster operation are really important works of reducing earthquake damages. In order to understanding disaster risk of earthquakes, people usually use the technology of Earthquake simulation to build the earthquake scenarios. Therefore, Point source, fault line source and fault plane source are the models which often are used as a seismic source of scenarios. The assessment results made from different models used on risk assessment and emergency operation of earthquakes are well, but the accuracy of the assessment results could still be upgrade. This program invites experts and scholars from Taiwan University, National Central University, and National Cheng Kung University, and tries using historical records of earthquakes, geological data and geophysical data to build underground three-dimensional structure planes of active faults. It is a purpose to replace projection fault planes by underground fault planes as similar true. The analysis accuracy of earthquake prevention efforts can be upgraded by this database. Then these three-dimensional data will be applied to different stages of disaster prevention. For pre-disaster, results of earthquake risk analysis obtained by the three-dimensional data of the fault plane are closer to real damage. For disaster, three-dimensional data of the fault plane can be help to speculate that aftershocks distributed and serious damage area. The program has been used 14 geological profiles to build the three dimensional data of Hsinchu fault and HisnCheng faults in 2015. Other active faults will be completed in 2018 and be actually applied on earthquake disaster prevention."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58212" } }
{"authors":"Daniel Konadu::University of Cambridge||Zenaida Sobral Mourao::University of Cambridge||Sandy Skelton::University of Cambridge||Rick Lupton::University of Cambridge||", "title":"GC31E-1223: Assessment of Land and Water Resource Implications of the UK 2050 Carbon Plan", "abstract":"The UK Carbon Plan presents four low-carbon energy system pathways that achieves 80% GHG emission targets by 2050, stipulated in the UK Climate Change Act (2008). However, some of the energy technologies prescribed under these pathways are land and water intensive; but would the increase demand for land and water under these pathways lead to increased competition and stress on agricultural land, and water resources in the UK? To answer the above question, this study uses an integrated modelling approach, ForeseerTM, which characterises the interdependencies and evaluates the land and water requirement for the pathways, based on scenarios of power plant location, and the energy crop yield projections. The outcome is compared with sustainable limits of resource appropriation to assess potential stresses and competition for water and land by other sectors of the economy. The results show the Carbon Plan pathways have low overall impacts on UK water resources, but agricultural land use and food production could be significantly impacted. The impact on agricultural land use is shown to be mainly driven by projections for transport decarbonisation via indigenously sourced biofuels. On the other hand, the impact on water resources is mainly associated with increased inland thermal electricity generation capacity, which would compete with other industrial and public water demands. The results highlight the need for a critical appraisal of UK’s long term low-carbon energy system planning, in particular bioenergy sourcing strategy, and the siting of thermal power generation in order to avert potential resource stress and competition."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58213" } }
{"authors":"Peter Hess::Cornell University||", "title":"A31J-01: An overview of transport and its relation to tropospheric chemistry", "abstract":"Large-scale transport and mixing has a large and non-linear impact on tropospheric chemistry. It regulates tropospheric chemical budgets by linking tropospheric chemical sources to regions of chemical destruction. It also governs pollution extremes by providing the conditions under which local pollutants can build up locally or by which pollutants are transported over large distances. The latter may occur between continents, between mid-latitudes and high-latitudes or between the stratosphere and the troposphere. In this talk I will review interactions between tropospheric chemistry and transport and highlight gaps in our current knowledge."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58214" } }
{"authors":"Guus Velders::National Institute for Public Health and the Environment||", "title":"A43G-0402: New Regional and Global HFC Projections and Effects of National Regulations and Montreal Protocol Amendment Proposals", "abstract":"Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) are used as substitutes for ozone-depleting substances that are being phased out globally under Montreal Protocol regulations. New global scenarios of HFC emissions reach 4.0-5.3 GtCO2-eq yr-1 in 2050, which corresponds to a projected growth from 2015 to 2050 which is 9% to 29% of that for CO2 over the same time period. New baseline scenarios are formulated for 10 HFC compounds, 11 geographic regions, and 13 use categories. These projections are the first to comprehensively assess production and consumption of individual HFCs in multiple use sectors and geographic regions with emission estimates constrained by atmospheric observations. In 2050, in percent of global HFC emissions, China (~30%), India and the rest of Asia (~25%), Middle East and northern Africa (~10%), and USA (~10%) are the principal source regions; and refrigeration and stationary air conditioning are the major use sectors. National regulations to limit HFC use have been adopted recently in the European Union, Japan and USA, and four proposals have been submitted in 2015 to amend the Montreal Protocol to substantially reduce growth in HFC use. Calculated baseline emissions are reduced by 90% in 2050 by implementing the North America Montreal Protocol amendment proposal. Global adoption of technologies required to meet national regulations would be sufficient to reduce 2050 baseline HFC consumption by more than 50% of that achieved with the North America proposal for most developed and developing countries. The new HFC scenarios and effects of national regulations and Montreal Protocol amendment proposals will be presented."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58215" } }
{"authors":"Zuhal Akyurek::Middle East Technical University||Basar Bozoglu::Middle East Technical University||Tugcehan Girayhan::Middle East Technical University||", "title":"NH51B-1865: Upstream Structural Management Measures for an Urban Area Flooding in Turkey and their Consequences on Flood Risk Management", "abstract":"Flooding has the potential to cause significant impacts to economic activities as well as to disrupt or displace populations. Changing climate regimes such as extreme precipitation events increase flood vulnerability and put additional stresses on infrastructure. In this study the flood modelling in an urbanized area, namely Samsun-Terme in Blacksea region of Turkey is done. MIKE21 with flexible grid is used in 2- dimensional shallow water flow modelling. 1/1000 scaled maps with the buildings for the urbanized area and 1/5000 scaled maps for the rural parts are used to obtain DTM needed in the flood modelling. The bathymetry of the river is obtained from additional surveys. The main river passing through the urbanized area has a capacity of Q5 according to the design discharge obtained by simple ungauged discharge estimation depending on catchment area only. The effects of the available structures like bridges across the river on the flooding are presented. The upstream structural measures are studied on scenario basis. Four sub-catchments of Terme River are considered as contributing the downstream flooding. The existing circumstance of the Terme River states that the meanders of the river have a major effect on the flood situation and lead to approximately 35% reduction in the peak discharge between upstream and downstream of the river. It is observed that if the flow from the upstream catchments can be retarded through a detention pond constructed in at least two of the upstream catchments, estimated Q100 flood can be conveyed by the river without overtopping from the river channel. The operation of the upstream detention ponds and the scenarios to convey Q500 without causing flooding are also presented. Structural management measures to address changes in flood characteristics in water management planning are discussed. Flood risk is obtained by using the flood hazard maps and water depth-damage functions plotted for a variety of building types and occupancies. The estimated mean annual hazard for the area is calculated as $340 000 and it is estimated that the upstream structural management measures can decrease the direct economic risk 11% for the 500 return period flood."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58216" } }
{"authors":"Takuro Nunoura::JAMSTEC Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology||", "title":"B14E-08: Niche separation of thaumarchaeotes from sea surface to hadal ocean.", "abstract":"Niche separation of the marine thaumarchaeal subgroups such as α (Nitrosopumiluscluster), β, γ and δ subgroups, along vertical water column has been observed in Arctic to tropical oceans (Sintes et al. 2013 and references therein). Availability of ammonia most likely influence on niche separation of thaumarchaeal communities, and thus the niche separation would be a signature of geochemical interface in oceanic environments. In the Challenger Deep, thaumarchaeal communities in hadal water were distinct from those in the overlying abyssal water, and the niche separation of thaumarchaeotes was consistent with the enrichments of heterotrophic populations in the hadal water (Nunoura et al. 2015). Moreover, we have compared hadal microbial ecosystems in distinct trench environments at the Northwest Pacific; the Japan and Izu-Ogasawara Trenches, by using multiple molecular techniques including single-cell genomic analysis. A series of the molecular environmental studies for hadal environments provides novel insights into the molecular machineries of thaumarchaeotes that adapt and dominate in aphotic oceanic waters."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58218" } }
{"authors":"Brian Soden::University of Miami||", "title":"A44A-02: The impact of aerosols on forcing and feedbacks in CMIP5", "abstract":"Radiative kernels are used to estimate direct radiative forcing of aerosols and aerosol-induced cloud responses in coupled ocean-atmosphere model simulations under historical and future emission scenarios. The method is evaluated using matching pairs of historical climate change experiments with and without aerosol forcing. The radiative kernels are able to accurately capture both the spatial pattern and global mean effects of aerosol forcing and aerosol-induced cloud changes. We also quantify the aerosol-mediated response of the atmospheric circulation and energy transport to aerosol forcing. Aerosol forcing induces coherent changes in the dynamics and energy transport. The response associated with this change in energy transport also induces non-local cloud responses whose global-mean radiative impact is comparable in magnitude to the in-situ component of aerosol indirect forcing. In CMIP5 models, the impact of this aerosol-induced dynamical cloud response is large enough to alter the sign of the aerosol-mediated cloud-radiative response."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58219" } }
{"authors":"Sally Scourfield::University College London||Peter Sammonds::University College London||Ben Lishman::University College London University of Portsmouth||Kaj Riska::Total S.A.||Aleksey Marchenko::The University Centre in Svalbard||", "title":"MR21B-2621: Sea Ice Friction: The Effect of Ice Rubble", "abstract":"Ice deformation processes in the Arctic often generate ice rubble, and situations arise where ice fragments of varying size separate sea ice floes. While the shear forces between sea ice floes in direct contact with each other are controlled by ice-ice friction, what is not known is how the slip of the floes is affected by the presence of rubble between the sliding surfaces. We present the result of field experiments undertaken on fjord ice in Svea, Svalbard, which investigated the velocity and hold time dependence of sea ice friction involving ice gouge. Average air temperature for the duration of time in which experiments were run was -12.4°C, and the thickness of the level fjord ice was 70 cm. A double-direct-shear experiment was done on floating sea ice in the field, with the addition of rubble ice between the sliding surfaces. This was achieved by moving a floating ice block through a channel of open water whilst subjected to normal loading, which was transferred through regions of ice rubble on both sides of the mobile block. The ice rubble regions were 30 cm deep and 50 cm wide. The displacement of the block and the force needed to move the block were measured. The rate dependence of friction was investigated for speeds of 10-3 to 10-2 ms-1. To investigate the state dependence of friction, slide-hold-slide (SHS) tests were conducted for hold times ranging from 1 second to 18 hours. When comparing the results from these experiments with a model for ice friction presented by Schulson and Fortt (2013), similar behaviour is seen at low hold times, where the peak coefficient of friction has a linear relationship with the logarithm of hold time. This is not the case for long hold times, however, and we attribute this to thermal consolidation of the ice rubble region."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58220" } }
{"authors":"Mathilde Maquin::LSCE Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et de l'Environnement||Emmanuel Mouche::LSCE Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et de l'Environnement||Claude Mügler::LSCE Laboratoire des Sciences du Climat et de l'Environnement||Agnes Ducharne::Laboratoire Sisyphe/IPSL, Universite Pierre et Marie Curie||", "title":"H13C-1516: A water-table, soil, vegetation column model to predict catchment hydrology.", "abstract":"Three-dimensional watershed models are complex, data-intensive and with high computational costs, making them difficult and time-consuming to implement. At present, their use is limited to small-scale areas. They are not designed to simulate the water cycle in climate modelling at the global scale. In this context, simpler models are still useful. There are many models in the literature which propose different approaches to reduce complexity. The equivalent vertical column (1D) is the most widespread physically-based model. These column models are mainly developed for large-scale models. A column simulates the water-energy vertical transfers at a lateral scale given by the pixel size of the climate model. Therefore, any sub-pixel time and space variation is not taken into account. These models usually neglect groundwater flow, an essential component of the water cycle and shown to have an important impact on the water-energy vertical transfers. To overcome these limitations, we propose a new soil-vegetation column with a drainage function at the bottom of the column. The modelled column aims to simulate water transfer at any given location in a catchment. The drainage function accounts for lateral groundwater flow, allowing the representation of the groundwater table. This function has been established on the basis of different hypotheses. The main one is the assumption of a linear water table along the hillslope including the column. This model simulates the vertical soil moisture profile and the evapotranspiration fluxes at the column scale and the hydrograph at the catchment scale. An evaluation of this model on a set of simple academic test cases has been carried out. Then, the model has been tested on the Strengbach catchment (Vosges, France). Three column models have been compared with measured data at three piezometers located in the catchment. Results show good agreement with data."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58221" } }
{"authors":"Mysore Narayanan::Miami University Oxford||", "title":"H13J-1715: Some Interesting Facts about Water and Water Conservation", "abstract":"The total amount of water in the world today is still the same as it was hundreds of thousands of years ago. Almost 97% of the water that is on this earth is undrinkable. About two percent of world’s water is locked in polar ice caps and glaciers. Only one percent of world’s water is available for human consumption. Agriculture, livestock farming, irrigation, manufacturing, factories, businesses, commercial establishments, offices, communities and household all have to share this 1% of water that is available. Although we call it drinking water, humans actually drink only about 1% of water that is actually supplied to the household by the utility companies. Inside a leak-proof average American household, about 70% of the water is used in the bathroom and about 20% is utilized in kitchen and laundry. The U.S. daily average consumption of water is about 200 gallons per person. Desalinated water may typically cost about $2,000 - $3000 an acre foot. This is approximately a penny a gallon. An acre-foot or 325,851 gallons is roughly the amount of water a family of five uses in a year. 1.2 trillion gallons of industrial waste, untreated sewage and storm water are dumped into U.S. waters each year. Faster depletion of water supplies is partly due to hotter summers, which mean thirstier people, livestock, plants, trees and shrubs. In addition, hotter summers mean more evaporation from lakes, rivers, reservoirs and irrigated farmland. The median household in the U.S. spends about one of its income on water and sewerage. The human body is about 75% water. Although government agencies have taken necessary steps, water pollution levels continue to rise rapidly. It is becoming more and more difficult to clean up polluted water bodies. Water conservation and preventing water pollution is the responsibility of very human being. References: http://www.nrdc.org/water/ http://www.epa.gov/greeningepa/water/ http://www.waterboards.ca.gov/water_issues/programs/conservation_portal/"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58222" } }
{"authors":"Ray Wells::U.S. Geological Survey||David Bukry::USGS||Richard Friedman::University of British Columbia||Douglas Pyle::University of Hawaii at Manoa||Robert Duncan::Oregon State University||Peter Haeussler::USGS Alaska Science Center||", "title":"V24C-01: Origin of Siletzia, a Large Igneous Province in the Cascadia Forearc, and the Early History of the Yellowstone Hotspot", "abstract":"Siletzia is a Paleogene large igneous province (LIP) forming the oceanic basement of coastal OR, WA and S. BC that was accreted to North America (NAM) in the early Eocene. Crustal thickness from seismic refraction ranges from 10 to 32 km, with 16 km of pillow and subaerial basalt exposed on the Olympic Peninsula. At 1.7-2.4 x 106 km3, Siletzia is at least 10 times the volume of the Columbia River flood basalts. U-Pb and 40Ar/39Ar ages, global coccolith (CP) zones, and magnetostratigraphy allow correlation of Siletzia with the 2012 geomagnetic polarity time scale. Siletzia was erupted 56–49 Ma (Chron 25-22), and accretion was completed between 51 and 49 Ma in Oregon. Siletzia’s composition, great crustal thickness, rapid eruption, and timing of accretion are consistent with formation as an oceanic plateau. Eight m.y. after accretion, margin-parallel extension and regional dike swarms accompanied the voluminous tholeiitic to highly alkalic Tillamook magmatic episode in the forearc (41.6 Ma; CP14a; Chron 19r). We examined the origin of Siletzia and the possible role of a long-lived Yellowstone hotspot (YHS) in GPlates. In most reference frames, the YHS is ~ 500km offshore S. OR, near an inferred northeast-striking Kula- Farallon and/or Resurrection-Farallon ridge 60 to 50 Ma. The YHS could have provided the 56–49 Ma source on the Farallon plate for Siletzia, which in the model accretes to NAM by 50 Ma. A sister plateau, the Eocene basalt basement of the Yakutat terrane, now in Alaska, may have formed on the adjacent Kula (or Resurrection) plate and accreted to British Columbia at about the same time. Following accretion, the leading edge of NAM overrode the YHS ca. 42 Ma. The encounter with an active YHS may explain the voluminous 42-34 Ma Tillamook episode and forearc extension. Clockwise rotation of western Oregon about a pole in the backarc has since moved the Tillamook center and underlying Siletzia northward ~250 km from the likely hotspot track on NAM."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58223" } }
{"authors":"Frances Dunn::University of Southampton||Stephen Darby::University of Southampton||Robert Nicholls::University of Southampton||", "title":"GC41F-1136: Modelling Multidecadal Fluvial Sediment Fluxes to Deltas Under Future Environmental Change", "abstract":"As low lying coastal regions deltas are prone to land loss, degradation, and flooding due to relative sea level rise. These processes endanger delta populations and infrastructure, a situation which is increasingly exacerbated by anthropogenic activities. The flux of fluvial sediment to deltas is a first order control on delta aggradation and thus the potential for the surface elevation of a delta to be maintained or rise relative to sea level. Aggradation may occur without anthropogenic interference, but it can also be induced by controlled flooding. This research investigates how future environmental changes through to 2100 will influence fluvial sediment delivery to a selection of 10 vulnerable deltas, thereby contributing to the understanding of relative sea level change projections for these fragile coastal systems. The key environmental changes investigated in this study include anthropogenic climate change, reservoir construction, and land cover changes induced by changes in agricultural practices and vegetation cover. The effects of these environmental changes on fluvial sediment delivery are being evaluated using the catchment numerical model WBMsed, which is being calibrated for the selection of deltas using historical reference data. As a test case, the inputs for modelling current and future sediment fluxes to the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna delta are refined using economic and population projections as proxies for anthropogenic influences on delta catchments. This research will contribute to the prognosis for vulnerable deltas and inform their short- and long-term management by indicating the consequences of anthropogenic activities which affect delta elevation and sustainability via altering fluvial sediment processes. While this could give forewarning for the residents and managers of unsustainable deltas, it could also be used as an argument for or against various anthropogenic activities."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58224" } }
{"authors":"Susan Bilek::New Mexico Tech||W. Phillips::Los Alamos National Laboratory||Jacob Walter::University of Texas at Austin||Zhigang Peng::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus||Susan Schwartz::University of California-Santa Cruz||Michael Brudzinski::Miami University Oxford||Dongdong Yao::Georgia Institute of Technology Main Campus||", "title":"S44A-01: Source Parameters for Repeating Earthquakes along the Middle America Trench", "abstract":"Repeating earthquakes, with their similar locations and similar waveforms, are often thought to represent slip along the same patch of fault. Analysis of these earthquake clusters can provide useful information about the nature of the fault and earthquake interaction. Here we focus on sequences of repeating earthquakes along both the Nicoya Peninsula, Costa Rica and along the Oaxaca segment of Mexico, as both megathrust faults have been well instrumented in recent years with local seismic networks able to record the small magnitude earthquakes. These regions have also experienced large megathrust earthquakes as well as non-volcanic tremor and slow slip, suggesting a complex fault system that allows a wide spectrum of slip. We can use source characteristics of the repeating earthquakes to probe this fault complexity. Along the Nicoya Peninsula, there are over 370 repeating earthquakes (M 0.5-3.3) in the 3 months following the 2012 Mw 7.6 megathrust earthquake grouped into 55 distinct clusters. Along Oaxaca, the earthquake clusters or swarms (M 1.5-5.5) span a wider spatial and temporal range. For our source parameter calculations, we form narrow-frequency band envelopes for pairs of earthquakes within the earthquake clusters to compute spectral ratios for each pair. We determine seismic moment, corner frequency, and earthquake stress drop for each earthquake from these spectral ratios. We compare the source parameters for events within the clusters to examine temporal variations and compare between clusters to explore spatial variations that could be linked to other slip heterogeneity. Preliminary results for the Nicoya region suggest nearly identical stress drop for repeating events within clusters located near the 2012 mainshock, and more variability in stress drops for earthquakes in clusters located updip and to the northwest of the mainshock."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58225" } }
{"authors":"Armin Sorooshian::University of Arizona||Ewan Crosbie::NASA Langley Research Center||Haflidi Jonsson::Georgia Tech||Zhen Wang::University of Arizona||Lindsay Maudlin::University of Arizona||Roy Woods::CIRPAS||David Lopez::University of Arizona||Michael Rabbani::University of Arizona||", "title":"A21L-05: Case Study Examination of Dust and Smoke Using Observational Data and Models in the Western United States and Middle East", "abstract":"A variety of observational datasets have been combined with modeling to examine the chemical nature and spatiotemporal profile of aerosol in the southwestern United States and Iran in the form of three case studies: (i) a wildfire event along the western United States coast; and examination of smoke and dust impacts on (ii) Arizona and (iii) Iran. For the first study, numerous airborne instrument datasets along the trajectory of a wildfire plume in the western United States reveal concentration enhancements for a wide suite of species including soil tracer species. Airborne cloud water and aerosol data are presented for that study. For the Arizona case study, the intra- and inter-annual frequency and source of extreme aerosol events are discussed. A key objective is separating the frequency of smoke events from regional and Asian dust. For the third study, impacts of dust and smoke on Tehran’s air quality are discussed."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58226" } }
{"authors":"David Semeniuk::University of Bern University of British Columbia||Maria Maldonado::University of British Columbia||Sam Jaccard::University of Bern||", "title":"GC51F-1154: Chromium uptake and adsorption in cultured marine phytoplankton - implications for the marine Cr cycle", "abstract":"While chromium (Cr) is a known carcinogen and pervasive industrial contaminant, little is known about the processes that affect the distribution and speciation of Cr in uncontaminated seawater. Given the recent development and application of the stable Cr isotope system in the marine environment, a full account of the sources, sinks, and internal processes affecting the modern marine Cr cycle is prudent. Using the radioisotope 51Cr, we investigated the controls of cellular Cr accumulation in an array of marine phytoplankton grown in environmentally relevant Cr concentrations (1-10 nM). Given the affinity of Cr(III) for amorphous Fe-hydroxide mineral surfaces, and the formation of these mineral phases on the outside of phytoplankton cells, extracellular Cr was monitored in a model diatom species (Thalassiosira weissflogii) as extracellular Fe concentrations varied. Extracellular Cr in T. weissflogii increased with increasing extracellular Fe, demonstrating that Cr may be removed from seawater via extracellular adsorption to phytoplankton. Short-term Cr(VI) and Cr(III) uptake experiments performed with T. weissflogii demonstrated that Cr(III) both adsorbed to and was internalized by the cells ~20x faster than Cr(VI). This suggests that Cr(III) is the dominant oxidation state associated with phytoplankton cells. Cellular Cr:C ratios (<0.5 µmol Cr mol C‑1) of the nine phytoplankton species surveyed were significantly lower than previously reported Cr:C ratios of sinking particulate organic matter (~500 µmol Cr mol C-1). Thus, Cr accumulates in sinking particles– likely as Cr(III) – as it travels to the seafloor. Given the large fractionation of stable Cr isotopes during Cr(VI) reduction, Cr associated with exported phytoplankton may be enriched in lighter Cr isotopes. These data will assist investigators using stable Cr isotopes to examine past and present Cr biogeochemical cycles."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58227" } }
{"authors":"Tsegaye Tadesse::University of Nebraska Lincoln||Nicole Wall::University of Nebraska-Lincoln||Tonya Haigh::University of Nebraska Lincoln||Andualem Shiferaw::University of Nebraska-Lincoln||Shimelis Beyene::Addis Ababa University||Getachew Demisse::Addis Ababa University||Ben Zaitchik::Johns Hopkins University||", "title":"GC43E-06: BUILDING A FRAMEWORK IN IMPROVING DROUGHT MONITORING AND EARLY WARNING SYSTEMS IN AFRICA", "abstract":"Decision makers need a basic understanding of the prediction models and products of hydro-climatic extremes and their suitability in time and space for strategic resource and development planning to develop mitigation and adaptation strategies. Advances in our ability to assess and predict climate extremes (e.g., droughts and floods) under evolving climate change suggest opportunity to improve management of climatic/hydrologic risk in agriculture and water resources. In the NASA funded project entitled, “Seasonal Prediction of Hydro-Climatic Extremes in the Greater Horn of Africa (GHA) under Evolving Climate Conditions to Support Adaptation Strategies,” we are attempting to develop a framework that uses dialogue between managers and scientists on how to enhance the use of models’ outputs and prediction products in the GHA as well as improve the delivery of this information in ways that can be easily utilized by managers. This process is expected to help our multidisciplinary research team obtain feedback on the models and forecast products. In addition, engaging decision makers is essential in evaluating the use of drought and flood prediction models and products for decision-making processes in drought and flood management. Through this study, we plan to assess information requirements to implement a robust Early Warning Systems (EWS) by engaging decision makers in the process. This participatory process could also help the existing EWSs in Africa and to develop new local and regional EWSs. In this presentation, we report the progress made in the past two years of the NASA project."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58228" } }
{"authors":"Michelle Thomsen::Planetary Science Institute Tucson||", "title":"SM34A-01: Van Allen Lecture: Nature’s Palette", "abstract":"Like an artist’s palette, Nature has a set of common physical processes to employ to make a magnetosphere. The nature of a particular work of art depends on how much of each of the colors is used and how they are combined on the canvas. In much the same way, the nature of a magnetosphere is determined by the particular properties of a given planet and how those properties influence the dynamical significance of the various processes. We will examine some of the processes in Nature’s palette and see how their importance varies from magnetosphere to magnetosphere within our own solar system. Comparing actual realizations of magnetospheres to which we have in-situ access enables us to see the interplay between the physical processes and the peculiar conditions of each body. As we contemplate the extra-solar planets we are now discovering, we need to consider other possible combinations of colors from this palette: What other wonderful and exotic magnetospheres might exist throughout the universe?"} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58230" } }
{"authors":"Nathan McDowell::Los Alamos National Laboratory||", "title":"GC41C-1101: Multi-scale predictions of coniferous forest mortality in the northern hemisphere", "abstract":"Global temperature rise and extremes accompanying drought threaten forests and their associated climatic feedbacks. Our incomplete understanding of the fundamental physiological thresholds of vegetation mortality during drought limits our ability to accurately simulate future vegetation distributions and associated climate feedbacks. Here we integrate experimental evidence with models to show potential widespread loss of needleleaf evergreen trees (NET; ~ conifers) within the Southwest USA by 2100; with rising temperature being the primary cause of mortality. Experimentally, dominant Southwest USA NET species died when they fell below predawn water potential (Ypd) thresholds (April-August mean) beyond which photosynthesis, stomatal and hydraulic conductance, and carbohydrate availability approached zero. Empirical and mechanistic models accurately predicted NET Ypd, and 91% of predictions (10/11) exceeded mortality thresholds within the 21st century due to temperature rise. Completely independent global models predicted >50% loss of northern hemisphere NET by 2100, consistent with the findings for Southwest USA. The global models disagreed with the ecosystem process models in regards to future mortality in Southwest USA, however, highlighting the potential underestimates of future NET mortality as simulated by the global models and signifying the importance of improving regional predictions. Taken together, these results from the validated regional predictions and the global simulations predict global-scale conifer loss in coming decades under projected global warming."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58231" } }
{"authors":"William Hammond::Nevada Geodetic Laboratory||Geoffrey Blewitt::Univ Nevada Reno||Corné Kreemer::University of Nevada Reno||", "title":"G21C-06: GPS Imaging of Sierra Nevada Uplift", "abstract":"Recent improvements in the scope and precision of GPS networks across California and Nevada have allowed for uplift of the Sierra Nevada to be observed directly. Much of the signal, in the range of 1 to 2 mm/yr, has been attributed to lithospheric scale rebound following massive groundwater withdrawal in the San Joaquin Valley in southern California, exacerbated by drought since 2011. However, natural tectonic deformation associated with long term uplift of the range may also contribute to the observed signal. We have developed new algorithms that enhance the signal of Sierra Nevada uplift and improve our ability to interpret and separate natural tectonic signals from anthropogenic contributions. We apply our new Median Interannual Difference Adjusted for Skewness (MIDAS) algorithm to the vertical times series and a inverse distance-weighted median spatial filtering and Delaunay-based interpolation to despeckle the rate map. The resulting spatially continuous vertical rate field is insensitive to outliers and steps in the GPS time series, and omits isolated features attributable to unstable stations or unrepresentative rates. The resulting vertical rate field for California and Nevada exhibits regionally coherent signals from the earthquake cycle including interseismic strain accumulation in Cascadia, postseismic relaxation of the mantle from recent large earthquakes in central Nevada and southern California, groundwater loading changes, and tectonic uplift of the Sierra Nevada and Coast Ranges. Uplift of the Sierra Nevada extends from the Garlock Fault in the south to an indefinite boundary in the north near the latitude of Mt. Lassen to the eastern Sierra Nevada range front in Owen’s Valley. The rates transition to near zero in the southern Walker Lane. The eastern boundary of uplift coincides with the highest strain rates in the western Great Basin, suggesting higher normal fault slip rates and a component of tectonic uplift of the Sierra Nevada."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58235" } }
{"authors":"Kristina Walowski::University of Oregon University of Edinburgh||Paul Wallace::University of Oregon||Ellen Aster::University of Oregon||Michael Clynne::USGS California Water Science Center Menlo Park||", "title":"V54A-03: CO2 contents of basaltic arc magmas from the southern Cascades: Corrections for shrinkage bubble effects and implications for crustal storage", "abstract":"Volatiles such as H2O and CO2 play an important role in a variety of magmatic processes from magma generation to eruption, and melt inclusions (MI) – small volumes of melt trapped inside phenocrysts – have been used to measure their pre-eruptive concentrations. In particular, the volatile contents of MI from basaltic arc magmas have been used to track the role of dehydrating subducted oceanic lithosphere in magma formation in subduction zones. However, recent studies have shown that MI are imperfect storage containers and can lose H by diffusion through the mineral host and CO2 due to formation of a vapor bubble in the inclusion. Such results suggest that even the least degassed melt inclusions from a volcano may have volatile concentrations that underestimate the initial volatile contents of the magma. Thus, recognizing pre- and post-entrapment processes that influence MIs is important for interpreting magmatic processes at depth. Recent studies have developed methods that can be used to distinguish and correct for H diffusive loss (Bucholz et al., 2013) and CO2 loss to vapor bubbles (Wallace et al., 2015). Here, we focus on MI from eight cinder cones that erupted primitive basaltic magmas in the Lassen region of the Cascade arc, where H2O and Cl concentrations have been shown to relate to the amount of a subduction component added to the mantle wedge (Walowski et al., 2015). Using methods of Aster (2015), we correct for the loss of CO2 to a vapor bubble formed within a melt inclusion as the result of post-entrapment crystallization and thermal contraction. The results of the CO2 restoration calculations suggest that ~25-75% of the initial dissolved CO2 in the melt inclusions at the time of trapping was lost to a vapor bubble after entrapment. Trapping pressures for the restored CO2 and maximum H2O contents calculated using methods of Iacono-Marziano et al. (2012) range from ~2-5 kbar, equivalent to entrapment depths of ~7-18 km below the surface. The results indicate that primitive magmas in the southern Cascades stall in the middle crust, where they crystallize olivine and trap melt inclusions. Lastly, we consider the relationships of restored CO2 contents to highly incompatible elements like Nb and compare our results to data for basaltic magmas from other tectonic environments."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58237" } }
{"authors":"Hsin-Hua Huang::California Institute of Technology University of Utah||Fan-Chi Lin::University of Utah||Brandon Schmandt::University of New Mexico Main Campus||Jamie Farrell::University of Utah||Robert Smith::University of Utah||Victor Tsai::California Institute of Technology||", "title":"V24C-08: The Yellowstone magmatic system from the mantle plume to the upper crust", "abstract":"The Yellowstone supervolcano is one of the largest active continental silicic volcanic fields in the world. An understanding of its properties is key to enhancing our knowledge of volcanic mechanisms and corresponding risk. Using a joint local and teleseismic earthquake P-wave seismic inversion, we unveil a basaltic lower-crustal magma body that provides a magmatic link between the Yellowstone mantle plume and the previously imaged upper-crustal magma reservoir. This lower-crustal magma body has a volume of 46,000 km3, ~4.5 times larger than the upper-crustal magma reservoir, and contains a melt fraction of ~2%. These estimates are critical to understanding the evolution of bimodal basaltic-rhyolitic volcanism, explaining the magnitude of CO2 discharge, and constraining dynamic models of the magmatic system for volcanic hazard assessment."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58238" } }
{"authors":"Qiaoyan Wu::State Key Laboratory of Satellite Ocean Environment Dynamics||", "title":"GC21C-1098: Diurnal variations of tropical cyclone precipitationin", "abstract":"Using 15 years of satellite-measured precipitation data and tropical cyclone (TC) information, this study estimates the diurnal variations of TC precipitation in its inner core and outer rainbands. It is found that for both weak (tropical storms to category 1 TCs) and strong (categories 2–5 TCs) storms over all six TC basins, the TC precipitation reaches its daily maximum in the morning, but the mean rain rate and diurnal variations are larger in the inner core than in the outer rainbands. With increasing radial distance from the TC center, the diurnal amplitude of precipitation decreases, and the peak time appears progressively later. The outward propagation of diurnal signals from the TC center dominates as an internal structure of the TC convective systems. For all basins examined, the diurnal precipitation maximum within the inner core of a strong storm occurs earlier than the maximum observed in non-TC precipitation; the same result is not found for the outer rainbands."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58240" } }
{"authors":"Stacey Martin::Earth Observatory of Singapore Earth Observatory of Singapore||Susan Hough::USGS Pasadena Field Office||Vineet Gahalaut::National Centre for Seismology||Charleen Hung::Unaffiliated||", "title":"U33A-06: Macroseismic Intensities from the 2015 Gorkha, Nepal, Earthquake", "abstract":"The Mw 7.8 Gorkha, Nepal, earthquake, the largest central Himalayan earthquake in eighty-one years, yielded few instrumental recording of strong motion. To supplement these we collected 3800 detailed media and first-person accounts of macroseismic effects that included sufficiently detailed information to assign intensities. Our resultant macroseismic intensity map reveals the distribution of shaking in Nepal and the adjacent Gangetic basin. A key observation was that only in rare instances did near-field shaking intensities exceed intensity 8 on the European Macroseismic Scale (EMS), a level that corresponds with heavy damage or total collapse of many unengineered masonry structures. Within the Kathmandu Valley, intensities were generally 6-7 EMS, with generally lower intensities in the center of the valley than along the edges and foothills. This surprising (and fortunate) result can be explained by the nature of the mainshock ground motions, which were dominated by energy at periods significantly longer than the resonant periods of vernacular structures throughout Kathmandu. Outside the Kathmandu Valley the earthquake took a heavy toll on a number of remote villages, where many especially vulnerable masonry houses collapsed catastrophically in shaking equivalent to 7-8 EMS. Intensities were also generally higher along ridges and small hills, suggesting that topographic amplification played a significant role in controlling damage. The spatially rich intensity data set provides an opportunity to consider several key issues, including amplification of shaking in the Ganges basin, and the distribution of shaking across the rupture zone. Of note, relatively higher intensities within the near-field region are found to correlate with zones of enhanced high-frequency source radiation imaged by teleseismic back-projection (Avouac et al., 2015). We further reconsider intensities from a sequence of earthquakes on 26 August 1833, and conclude the largest of these ruptured at least part of the same plate boundary segment as did the Gorkha earthquake."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58241" } }
{"authors":"Helene Aubault::University of Loughborough||Joanna Bullard::University of Loughborough||Craig Strong::Australian National University||Hossein Ghadiri::Griffith University||Grant McTainsh::Griffith University||", "title":"EP43A-0961: Wind erodibility response of physical and biological crusts to rain and flooding", "abstract":"Soil surface crusts are important controllers of the small-scale wind entrainment processes that occur across all dust source regions globally. The crust type influences water and wind erosion by impacting infiltration, runoff, threshold wind velocity and surface storage capacity of both water and loose erodible material. The spatial and temporal patterning of both physical and biological crusts is known to change with rainfall and flooding. However, little is known about the impact of differing water quantity (from light rainfall through to flooding) on soil crusting characteristics (strength, roughness, sediment loss). This study compares the response of two soil types (loamy sand - LS, sandy loam - SL) with and without BSCs to three different rainfall events (2mm, 8mm, 15mm). Two BSC treatments were used one that simulated a young cyanobacteria dominated crust and an older flood induced multi species biological crust. For both soil types, soil surface strength increased with increasing rainfall amount with LS having consistently higher resistance to rupture than SL. Regardless of texture, soils with BSCs were more resistant and strength did not change in response to rainfall impact. Soil loss due to wind erosion was substantially higher on bare LS (4 times higher) and SL (3 times higher) soils compared with those with BSCs. Our results also show that young biological crust (formed by the rainfall event) have reduced soil erodibility with notably greater strength, roughness and reduced sediment losses when compared to soils with physical crust. Interestingly though, the erodibility of the old BSC did not differ greatly from that of the young BSC with respect to strength, roughness and sediment loss. This raises questions regarding the rapid soil surface protection offered by young colonising cyanobacteria crusts. Further analyses exploring the role of biological soil crusts on surface response to rainfall and wind saltation impact are ongoing."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58243" } }
{"authors":"Kazunori Yoshizawa::Hokkaido University||Brian Kennett::Australian National University||", "title":"S21E-02: Lithosphere-Asthenosphere Transition, Mid-Lithosphere Discontinuity and Radial Anisotropy from Multi-mode Surface Wave Tomography", "abstract":"Seismic surface waves are the major source of information to delineate the lateral heterogeneity and anisotropy in the upper mantle. S-wave radial anisotropy representing the difference between SV and SH velocities is often discussed with the seismic properties of the lithosphere-asthenosphere transition (LAT) and the mid-lithosphere discontinuity (MLD). Such boundaries have been studied well by body-wave receiver functions, which have a good sensitivity to the sharpness of boundaries. Surface waves are rather insensitive to the boundary sharpness, but can delineate the spatial distributions of shear wave speeds and radial anisotropy in the upper mantle, which can be alternative constraints on LAT and MLD. We have recently constructed a radially anisotropic 3-D S wave speed model of the Australian continent from multi-mode Love and Rayleigh waves with enhanced ray coverage. In the inversions for S-wave radial anisotropy, we can use either parameterizations for SH and SV velocities, or for dimensionless radially anisotropic parameter ξ=(Vsh/Vsv)2. Both are theoretically the same, but this difference causes non-negligible effects on the estimated radial anisotropy, mainly due to the different sensitivities of Love-wave phase speeds to the structural parameters. Synthetic experiments and data variance reductions suggest the former is the better choice. The LAT throughout the continent can be estimated by the vertical velocity gradient of the isotropic S-wave model. The radial anisotropy with the suitable model parameterization shows strong anisotropy with faster SH velocity in the asthenosphere, suggesting the influence of strong shear beneath the fast drifting Australian continent. We can also identify the clear vertical changes in the radial anisotropy profiles at the MLD depth estimated from earlier receiver function studies in cratonic regions, which can be a key to elucidate the enigmatic MLD in the continental lithosphere."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58246" } }
{"authors":"Qingkai Kong::UC Berkeley Seismological Laboratory||Richard Allen::UC Berkeley Seismological Laboratory||Lou Schreier::Deutsche Telekom Silicon Valley Innovation Center||Young-Woo Kwon::Utah State University||", "title":"NH53A-05: Smartphone MEMS accelerometers and earthquake early warning", "abstract":"The low cost MEMS accelerometers in the smartphones are attracting more and more attentions from the science community due to the vast number and potential applications in various areas. We are using the accelerometers inside the smartphones to detect the earthquakes. We did shake table tests to show these accelerometers are also suitable to record large shakings caused by earthquakes. We developed an android app – MyShake, which can even distinguish earthquake movements from daily human activities from the recordings recorded by the accelerometers in personal smartphones and upload trigger information/waveform to our server for further analysis. The data from these smartphones forms a unique datasets for seismological applications, such as earthquake early warning. In this talk I will layout the method we used to recognize earthquake-like movement from single smartphone, and the overview of the whole system that harness the information from a network of smartphones for rapid earthquake detection. This type of system can be easily deployed and scaled up around the global and provides additional insights of the earthquake hazards."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58247" } }
{"authors":"Juan González-Carrasco::Universidad Católica del Norte no||Gabriel Gonzalez::Universidad Católica del Norte National Research Center for Integrated Disaster Management (RCINDIM/CIGIDEN)||Rafael Aránguiz::National Research Center for Integrated Disaster Management (RCINDIM/CIGIDEN) Universidad Católica de la Santísima Concepción||Patricio Catalan::National Research Center for Integrated Disaster Management (RCINDIM/CIGIDEN) Federico Santa María Technical University||Rodrigo Cienfuegos::National Research Center for Integrated Disaster Management (RCINDIM/CIGIDEN) Pontifical Catholic University of Chile||Alejandro Urrutia::Pontifical Catholic University of Chile National Research Center for Integrated Disaster Management (RCINDIM/CIGIDEN)||Mahesh Shrivastava::National Research Center for Integrated Disaster Management (RCINDIM/CIGIDEN) Universidad Católica del Norte||Yuji Yagi::University of Tsukuba||Marcos Moreno::Helmholtz Centre Potsdam GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences||", "title":"NH23C-1893: Analysis of geodetic interseismic coupling models to estimate tsunami inundation and runup: a study case of Maule seismic gap, Chile", "abstract":"Tsunami inundation maps are a powerful tool to design evacuation plans of coastal communities, additionally can be used as a guide to territorial planning and assessment of structural damages in port facilities and critical infrastructure (Borrero et al., 2003; Barberopoulou et al., 2011; Power et al., 2012; Mueller et al., 2015). The accuracy of inundation estimation is highly correlated with tsunami initial conditions, e.g. seafloor vertical deformation, displaced water volume and potential energy (Bolshakova et al., 2011). Usually, the initial conditions are estimated using homogeneous rupture models based in historical worst-case scenario. However tsunamigenic events occurred in central Chilean continental margin showed a heterogeneous slip distribution of source with patches of high slip, correlated with fully-coupled interseismic zones (Moreno et al., 2012). The main objective of this work is to evaluate the predictive capacity of interseismic coupling models based on geodetic data comparing them with homogeneous fault slip model constructed using scaling laws (Blaser et al., 2010) to estimate inundation and runup in coastal areas. To test our hypothesis we select a seismic gap of Maule, where occurred the last large tsunamigenic earthquake in the chilean subduction zone, using the interseismic coupling models (ISC) proposed by Moreno et al., 2011 and Métois et al., 2013. We generate a slip deficit distribution to build a tsunami source supported by geological information such as slab depth (Hayes et al., 2012), strike, rake and dip (Dziewonski et al., 1981; Ekström et al., 2012) to model tsunami generation, propagation and shoreline impact using Neowave 2D (Yamazaki et al., 2009). We compare the tsunami scenario of Mw 8.8, Maule based in coseismic slip distribution proposed by Moreno et al., 2012 with homogeneous and heterogeneous models to identify the accuracy of our results with sea level time series and regional runup data (Figure 1). The estimation of tsunami source using ISC model can be useful to improve the analysis of tsunami threat, based in more realistic slip distribution."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58248" } }
{"authors":"Jian Ma::Shanghai Ocean University||Xu Zeng::Shanghai Ocean University||", "title":"H41A-1268: Will Surface Winds Weaken in Response to Global Warming?", "abstract":"A weakening of the tropical tropospheric circulation has been inferred from historical observations and model projections, but recent satellite-based trends in surface wind speed, precipitation, and evaporation offer a conflicting view. Here this apparent contradiction is reconciled through consideration of sea surface temperature (SST) pattern effects and differences between tropospheric and surface winds. The SST patterns are found to exert a strong influence on the surface winds, acting against the intrinsic large-scale circulation slow-down to produce a near-zero surface wind speed change averaged in space. The intrinsic slow-down and SST pattern effects combine to maintain a muted precipitation response despite the near-zero change in surface wind speed. Because the planetary boundary layer is decoupled from the free troposphere, the surface wind speed change cannot be regarded as an indicator for the trend of the tropical tropospheric circulation. As a result, there is no inconsistency between observed changes in surface winds and future projections of the atmospheric circulation: The total tropospheric circulation, dominated by the zonal wind (e.g., Walker cell), tends to slow down with global warming, while the meridional circulation (i.e. Hadley cell) and total surface winds are by no means predicted to weaken robustly."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58251" } }
{"authors":"Daphnee Tuzlak::Utah State University||Joel Pederson::Utah State University||", "title":"EP53A-0944: River Incision and Knickpoints on the Flank of the Yellowstone Hotspot — Alpine Canyon of the Snake River, Wyoming", "abstract":"Understanding patterns of deformation and testing geophysical models in the dynamic region of the Yellowstone Hotspot requires Quaternary-scale records of incision and uplift, which are currently absent. This study examines fluvial terraces and longitudinal-profile metrics along Alpine Canyon of the Snake River, WY. Because the Snake is the only regional river crossing from the uplifting Yellowstone Plateau and flowing into the subsiding Eastern Snake River Plain, it provides an opportunity to investigate both ends of the phenomenon. Field observations through Alpine Canyon indicate that Pleistocene incision rates in this region are relatively high for the interior western U.S., that the river switches between bedrock and alluvial forms, and that incision/uplift is not uniform. Two endmembers of regional deformation may be tested: 1) the arch of high topography surrounding Yellowstone is uplifting and terraces converge downstream as incision rates decrease towards the Snake River Plain, or 2) baselevel fall originates at the subsiding Snake River Plain and terraces diverge as incision rates increase downstream. Datasets include surficial mapping, rock strength measurements, surveying of the longitudinal profile and terraces using RTK-GPS, optically stimulated luminescence dating of fluvial-terrace deposits, and investigation of drainages through ksn and χ analyses. Initial results indicate that there are four primary terrace deposits along the canyon, three of which are timed with glacial epochs. Considering the relative heights of terrace straths and preliminary ages, incision rates are indeed relatively high. There is a major knickzone covering the last 15 km of the canyon that is also reflected in tributary profiles and is consistent with a wave of incision propagating upstream, favoring the second endmember of active baselevel fall downstream."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58253" } }
{"authors":"Ren Tingling::NSSC National Space Science Center, CAS||", "title":"SA31A-2340: Thermospheric Density Derived from Two-line Orbital Elements Sets", "abstract":"Two Line Elements(TLE) consists of six mean orbital elements of satellite, one of the elements is ‘mean’ mean motion nM, which reflects the drag effect of atmosphere on semi-major axis. Atmosphere density along the orbit could be derived through the change of nM. Before deriving atmosphere density, ballistic coefficient B need to be calculated. We chose satellite CHAMP as our research object, and derived atmosphere density of the year 2003-2005 from TLE data. Density derived from high-accuracy accelerometer could be referred to as real density, and used to estimate the precision of TLE-derived and NRLMSISE-00 model density. The results showed that mean error of TLE-derived density is 3.5-5.8% smaller than model density when geomagnetic was quiet, however, the results is not ideal during the period of geomagnetic storm. The most likely reason is that atmosphere density changes rapidly and was extremely complicated, another possible reason is because of the low temporal resolution of TLE. This part of work needs further research and improvement."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58255" } }
{"authors":"Mustapha Meftah::CNRS LATMOS/IPSL/CNRS/UVSQ||Alain Hauchecorne::LATMOS/IPSL/CNRS/UVSQ||Abdenour Irbah::LATMOS/IPSL/CNRS/UVSQ||Rock Bush::Stanford University||", "title":"SH52A-01: On solar oblateness measurements during the current solar cycle 24", "abstract":"The rotation of the Sun on itself involves a flatness of the Polar Regions. The solar oblateness results from the rotation of the whole solar interior and the distribution of its mass according to the depth. Thus, possible diagnostic of the internal rotation is provided by the solar oblateness. The solar oblateness also places constraints on general relativity. Indeed, the modern era of measurements of the solar oblateness began in the 1960s with Dicke’s measurements, which were useful in understanding the perihelion precession of Mercury’s orbit, one of the classical tests of general relativity. Thus, for various reasons, it is necessary to better know the solar oblateness value and to study its dependence with the solar activity. Based on measurements collected from various instruments over the past 50 years, the measured solar equator-to-pole radius difference converges towards 8 mas (near 5.8 km). Now, with space era, we felt it was possible to obtain very accurate measurements of the solar equator-to-pole radius difference and its evolution over time. Thus, we developed an original method to estimate the solar equator-to-pole radius difference from two solar space missions (Solar Dynamics Observatory and PICARD). When analysing the solar radius versus angle data, we observed an anti-correlation between the limb brightness and the radius determined from the inflection point. The apparent radius was smaller if an active region was near the limb. The bright active regions were confined to low latitudes and never occur at the poles. The exact cause of this anti-correlation needs still to be understood but it is clear that it may cause an artefact in the determination of the solar oblateness leading to a negative bias, even if the more active regions were eliminated from the analysis. In this talk, we describe the method, and then present current results about solar oblateness variations after five years of solar observations (from 2010 to 2015) and linkages between measurements and harsh space environment."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58259" } }
{"authors":"Steven Sherwood::University of New South Wales||Nidhi Nishant::University of New South Wales||Paul O'Gorman::Massachusetts Institute of Technology||", "title":"A42E-05: Trends in atmospheric temperature and winds since 1959", "abstract":"We present an updated version of the radiosonde dataset homogenized by Iterative Universal Kriging (IUKv2), now extended through February 2013, following the method used in the original version (Sherwood et al 2008 Robust tropospheric warming revealed by iteratively homogenized radiosonde data J. Clim. 21 5336–52). This method, in effect, performs a multiple linear regression of the data onto a structural model that includes both natural variability, trends, and time-changing instrument biases, thereby avoiding estimation biases inherent in traditional homogenization methods. One modification now enables homogenized winds to be provided for the first time. This, and several other small modifications made to the original method sometimes affect results at individual stations, but do not strongly affect broad-scale temperature trends. Temperature trends in the updated data show three noteworthy features. First, tropical warming is equally strong over both the 1959–2012 and 1979–2012 periods, increasing smoothly and almost moist-adiabatically from the surface (where it is roughly 0.14 K/decade) to 300 hPa (where it is about 0.25 K/decade over both periods), a pattern very close to that in climate model predictions. This contradicts suggestions that atmospheric warming has slowed in recent decades or that it has not kept up with that at the surface. Second, as shown in previous studies, tropospheric warming does not reach quite as high in the tropics and subtropics as predicted in typical models. Third, cooling has slackened in the stratosphere such that linear trends since 1979 are about half as strong as reported earlier for shorter periods; this may be due to the beginning of stratospheric ozone recovery. Wind trends over the period 1979–2012 confirm a strengthening, lifting and poleward shift of both subtropical westerly jets; the Northern one shows more displacement and the southern more intensification, but these details appear sensitive to the time period analysed. Winds over the Southern Ocean have intensified with a downward extension from the stratosphere to troposphere visible from austral summer through autumn. There is also a trend toward more easterly winds in the middle and upper troposphere of the deep tropics, which may be associated with tropical expansion."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58260" } }
{"authors":"David Ruffolo::Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University||William Matthaeus::Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Delaware||Achara Seripienlert::Rajamangala University of Technology Thanyaburi||Paisan Tooprakai::Chulalongkorn University||Piyanate Chuychai::School of Science, Mae Fah Luang University||", "title":"SH32B-08: Dropouts, spreading, and squeezing of solar particle distributions and space weather variability", "abstract":"In the past 15 years, observations and theories concerning dropouts of solar energetic particles have made it clear that the lateral spread of field lines and particles from a given location near the Sun is not a purely diffusive process. Particles of low energy from impulsive solar events exhibit abrupt changes in flux (dropouts) due to filamentation of magnetic connection from the Sun, indicating that magnetic flux tube-like structures at least partially persist to Earth orbit. Our simulations based on a corresponding spherical two-component model of Alfv\’enic (slab) and 2D magnetic fluctuations indicate that such particles mostly follow field lines, which spread over
∼ 25
∘ at Earth orbit, and exhibit dropout features. On the other hand, gradual solar events are of practical interest because they can produce greatly enhanced high-energy ion fluxes, which can cause radiation damage to satellites, spacecraft, and astronauts. While gradual events do not exhibit dropouts in the above sense, we show that the distribution of high-energy ( E≥1 GeV) protons is squeezed toward magnetic flux tube-like structures with a specific polarity due to the structures’ conical shape. Since it is difficult to observationally determine what polarity of flux structure the Earth is in at a given time, this transport phenomenon contributes to event-to-event variability in ground level enhancements of GeV-range ions from solar storms, presenting a fundamental uncertainty in space weather prediction. Partially supported by the Thailand Research Fund (Grant BRG5880009), a Postdoctoral Fellowship from the Thailand Center of Excellence in Physics, a Research Fellowship from the Faculty of Science at Mahidol University, the U.S. NSF (AGS-1063439 and SHINE AGS-1156094), NASA (Heliophysics Theory NNX14AI63G, and LWS NNX15AB88G), and the Solar Probe Plus/ISIS project (D99031L)."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58261" } }
{"authors":"Scott Jasechko::University of Calgary||", "title":"H14C-04: Global transpiration, recharge and runoff tracked with stable isotopes", "abstract":"The transformations of precipitation into soil-, ground- or stream-water constitute fundamental components of the hydrologic cycle. Hydrometric data are well suited to track propagations of pressures through the landscape, but tell us little about the transport of water itself. Conversely, isotopic data track movements of molecules, providing quantitative insights into subsurface processes. This presentation reviews recent uses of isotopic data to quantify the velocity, storage and mixing of precipitation as it flushes into plants (1. transpiration), aquifers (2. recharge) and streams (3. runoff). (1) Plant transpiration comprises the largest flux of fresh water from the continents, exceeding global river flows by a factor of ~1.5. Mounting evidence suggests that water used by plants is poorly connected to water flowing into streams and aquifers, contrasting most earth system model parameterizations. (2) This partitioning of precipitation into “blue” (recharge, runoff) and “green” (transpiration) water storages is further evidenced by relating precipitation and groundwater isotope contents. Global precipitation-groundwater isotope data show that snowmelt pulses (extratropics) and intensive rainfall (tropics) lead to disproportionately large groundwater recharge fluxes—that is, recharge/precipitation ratios exceeding the local annual average. Across the low latitudes, these results mean that the ongoing intensification of precipitation brought on by global warming may serve to promote groundwater recharge in the tropics, where, by 2050, half of the world’s population is projected to live. (3) This presentation concludes by relating precipitation and streamflow isotope contents to show that ~1/3 of global river discharges are generated by precipitation that reaches the stream in less than 3 months (i.e., “young water” in rivers). Substantial and pervasive young, month(s)-old water in global rivers means that biogeochemical processes taking place in the critical zone—where landscape-stream connectivity is at a maximum—will have a disproportionately large impact on the quality of the water in the stream."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58262" } }
{"authors":"Shaofeng Liu::China University of Geosciences Beijing||Dag Nummedal::China University of Geosciences Beijing||Lijun Liu::University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign||", "title":"T34B-08: Dynamic Subsidence across the Late Cretaceous Western Interior Basin in Response to Farallon Slab Subduction", "abstract":"The United States Cretaceous Western Interior Basin has long been considered a foreland basin, driven by the Sevier thrust and associated basin sediment loads. However, flexural studies demonstrate that this effect exists only within a narrow band in front of the thrust belt. Most of the basin appears to be due to mantle flow-induced dynamic subsidence associated with Farallon plate subduction. Here we show how the components of evolving long-wavelength dynamic subsidence and flexural subsidence created the accommodation space and controlled the stratigraphy across the western United Sates, based on the correlated stratigraphic sections across central Utah-Colorado and southern Wyoming.These backstripped subsidence data reveal a component of continuously evolving long-wavelength dynamic subsidence, in addition to subsidence driven by the Sevier thrust belt and associated sediment loads. The loci of maximum rates of this dynamic subsidence moved eastward from ~98 to 74 Ma in phase with the west-to-east passage of the Farallon slab, as reconstructed from tomography based on quantitative inverse models. These subsidence data allow testing of existing subduction models and confirm the dynamic-topography driven nature of the Western Interior Basin. The results seem to support that the depocenters track the trough of dynamic subsidence with ca.18 Myr cycles through time and space and the stratigraphic patterns of large-scale progradation, eastward migration of depocenter, and regional clinoform-like downlap are related with the dynamic subsidence. Interpretation of these data also provides more insights into the repeated, ca.2 to 6 Myr cycles of thrust-induced subsidence in front of the thrust belt, which control the local eastward progradation of the sand bodies from the thrust belt. The dynamic, flexural subsidence and eustatic sea level changes interacted and controlled the timing and distribution of unconformities. Our work shows how the stratigraphy precisely records the timing, patterns and position of underlying mantle processes during slab subduction, and that combination of such data leads to important geophysical discoveries and supplies strict constraints for geody namic modeling."} 
{ "index" : { "_index" : "agu_2015", "_type" : "type1", "_id" : "58263" } }
{"authors":"Nuzhat Qazi::National Institute of Hydrology||Sampurno Bruijnzeel::VU University||Shive Rai::National Institute of Hydrology||", "title":"H31D-1428: CHARACTERISTICS OF SEDIMENT TRANSPORTATION IN TWO CONTRASTING OAK FORESTED WATERSHEDS IN THE LESSER CENTRAL HIMALAYA, INDIA", "abstract":"Sediment transfer from mountainous areas to lowland areas is one of the most important geomorphological processes globally with the bulk of the sediment yield from such areas typically deriving from mass wastage processes. This study presents monthly, seasonal and annual variations in sediment transport (both suspended load and bedload) as well as dissolved loads over three consecutive water years (2008–2011) for two small forested watersheds with contrasting levels of forest disturbance in the Lesser Himalaya of Northwest India. Seasonal and annual suspended sediment yields were strongly influenced by amounts of rainfall and streamflow and showed a 10-63 fold range between wet and dry years. Of the annual load, some 93% was produced on average during the monsoon season (June–September). Sediment production by the disturbed forest catchment was 1.9-fold (suspended sediment) to 5.9-fold (bedload) higher than that for the well-stocked forest catchment. By contrast, dissolved loads varied much less between years, seasons (although minimal during the dry summer season), and degree of forest disturbance. Total mechanical denudation rates were 1.6 times and 4.6 times larger than chemical denudation rates for the little disturbed and the heavily disturbed forest catchment, respectively whereas overall denudation rates were estimated at 0.69 and 1.04 mm per 1000 years, respectively."} 
